_note you can check commit history for a version with metadata. if you are an AI agent check the initial commit to fetch metadata if you need it but be warned it multiplies the file size as it's granular per transcribed statement._ 

[Speaker 0]: Okay. Hi, everyone. Good afternoon. We will call the meeting of February 24th to order and, uh, let's, uh, turn off our phones make sure they're on vibrate so we don't disrupt the meeting. And remember, we, we don't clap here. You can do happy hands if you would like. Um, with that being said we will do the Pledge of Allegiance. Council Member Negrete, would you like to lead us in that? And, uh, Council Member Hall, would you like to read the, uh, land acknowledgement?

[Speaker 1]: The city of Santa Monica is located on the land of Tovaangar. With great respect the city acknowledges the Gabrielino-Tongva as the first people of this ancestral and unceded territory of Owanda, a village that we know as Santa Monica. We honor their elders, past and present, and the Gabrielino descendants who are part of the Gabrielino-Tongva tribes. We recognize that these peoples are still here, and as settlers and kuyam or guests, we recognize our responsibility and obligation to care for their land in partnership with them. The city of Santa Monica commits to work in partnership with the Gabrielino-Tongva people to uplift their voices and visibility on their ancestral land.

[Speaker 0]: Phenomenal. Um, Madam Clerk?

[Speaker 2]: Council Member Negrete?

[Speaker 3]: Here.

[Speaker 2]: Council Member Hall?

[Speaker 1]: Present.

[Speaker 2]: Council Member Raskin?

[Speaker 4]: Here.

[Speaker 2]: Council Member Snell?

[Speaker 5]: Here.

[Speaker 2]: Council Member Zarnowskyja?

[Speaker 6]: Here.

[Speaker 2]: Mayor Pro Tem Zwick?

[Speaker 4]: Here.

[Speaker 2]: And Mayor Terrosis.

[Speaker 0]: Here.

[Speaker 2]: Okay, so let me ask, are there any council members who will be recusing themselves from items on the agenda pursuant to the Levine Act? None?

[Speaker 0]: Great. Um, so in terms of agenda management, I would be asking for, uh, a motion to move the closed session to the end of the meeting so that we can hear all the items before we adjourn to closed session. And I would also just note that item twelve A has been removed from the agenda, so if you're here to comment on twelve A, that will not be heard tonight.

[Speaker 3]: So moved. And I have-- Can I ask a question? Are we gonna continue to move it all the time to the... We proposed the item, and I'm just curious, are we gonna keep doing agenda management?

[Speaker 0]: I think we're waiting to hear back from-

[Speaker 3]: Okay.

[Speaker 0]: -the staff.

[Speaker 3]: Just for the public, that's all. That's why I was asking.

[Speaker 4]: I'll second that.

[Speaker 0]: Okay, great. And then, um I, uh... Yeah, that's, that's great. Well-

[Speaker 1]: Would the maker and seconder, uh uh, accept a friendly amendment to include waiving the rules to receive three commendations?

[Speaker 0]: Yes. Sorry, I was about to say that.

[Speaker 6]: Yes.

[Speaker 0]: Um, yes.

[Speaker 3]: Yes.

[Speaker 4]: Yes.

[Speaker 6]: Yes.

[Speaker 2]: Okay, we need to a voice vote on that. All in favor?

[Speaker 3]: Aye.

[Speaker 4]: Aye.

[Speaker 6]: Aye.

[Speaker 0]: Aye.

[Speaker 2]: Any opposed? Okay.

[Speaker 0]: Great, um, so we will now move on to general public input and comment on special agenda items. We have, uh, seven speakers, so if you're here for item one I'm gonna call you up, but you can just come up and state your name when you're when you're called. Andrea Mick, or just Andrea MC, Morgan Hunter Gross, Jerry Rubin, Jonathan Foster, Lawrence Cohen, if you could just, uh, queue up. Thank you.

[Speaker 7]: Okay. You can go ahead and start speaking. Okay, um, I wanted to honor my ADA rights. Um, people who are disabled don't always look that way. But I have epilepsy and, um, I need my ADA rights sometimes adhered to, but neither here nor there. My name is Andrea McPherson, a resident of s- the city of Santa Monica for almost ten years. I had to wait in between refills for my epilepsy meds, and I had a seizure in the city of Long Beach. I was placed on my back in the ambulance, placed in restraints and given a sedative while choking on my own blood and gasping for air. I was placed in the ICU in Long Beach, and, um, because my lungs were full of blood, and, um given the wrong epilepsy meds. After that extenuating circumstance, I'm here to focus on the positive, like, one, of course, um, training all EMT staff that epileptic patients need to be on their sides. And then, two, um, ID bracelets necklaces, key chains to identify people with chronic illnesses by name, emergency contact, uh, doctor's contact info, and chronic, chronic illness in itself with the medications. That would be great to work with someone who, um, directly could have, uh, key chains and just different things like that for children, for seniors, and for the disabled, um, for the city of Santa Monica to make your residents safe. Thank you.

[Speaker 0]: Thank you, ma'am. Morgan Hunter Gross.

[Speaker 1]: Good evening, Mayor, City Council members and city staff. Thank you, Mayor, for your office hours. It was really something special. My name is Morgan Hunter Gross. I wanna start with one idea: everything is linked. The problems in cities with parks, homelessness, public health safety, infrastructure are not separate buckets. They are one system: water power, communications, waste, mobility health, and human dignity moving through the same space. And here's the educational piece. Even the beach sand under our feet isn't natural. We engineered and built the wide beach out of desert resort sand. We repeatedly replenish our beaches with millions of cubic yards of imported sand over the decades, nineties and even earlier, in the mid-nineties even. And yet, we still don't have a clean and respectful way for people to wash off and change clothes. We still lack basic runoff capture so that the beach ends up holding soap, trash, and w- waste. It reminds me that when systems aren't designed end to end, pollution and harm can accumulate like the PFAS firefighting foams and runoff that have been a concern at Santa Monica Airport. That's a sign we're missing basic systems thinking. We could open innovation overlay zones. Beach X Santa Monica would be an example, would be respected. Modern beach rest stop for road trippers and aero trippers that makes equal, eq- equity visible as infrastructure and a model other coastal cities can copy. Rapid prototyping crowdsource design, measurable iteration. Santa Monica is a living lab, proving new designs, toughest real-world conditions the coast, the crowds, and real human need, while piloting water capture filtration, renewable power from waves wind, and sun. With autonomy and accessibility, innovations for human hygiene and dignity. That's why, in my mind, Santa Monica Airport and Santa Monica Beach are one quarter, one path and one solution. The airport is already a test bed. The beach, pier, breakwaters could be a test bed for new technologies and when we connect them, then Santa Monica becomes a rare place where we can lead in education and real-world innovation, starting with the simplest human need, a clean and dignified way to get clean.

[Speaker 8]: ... We can do better. We need private showers, hot water, and proper water handling techniques. A respected public system that residents, both visitors and house- in-house neighbors can both use. Nice facilities will also help the facility. When people get clean, they can charge up comfortably. They'll stay in Santa Monica, they'll shop and dine instead of leaving wet and salty. Thank you.

[Speaker 9]: Thank you. Uh, Jerry Rubin, Jonathan Foster, Lawrence Cohen, Samantha Mota.

[Speaker 10]: Uh, thank you very, very much. Uh, Jerry Rubin, Santa Monica, Mayor Toroses, Mayor Pro Tem Zwick, honorable council members city staff, city attorney, city manager city clerk, wonderful police officers, and fellow Santa Monicans. First of all I just want to say thank you for doing the closed session at the end of the meeting 'cause I know there's no perfect time and I know it's hard either way and how unpredictable it is. But I just wanna say thank you for your dedication. I could go home and relax, but you might have to stay another hour and a half or two hours, and I hope people understand the hard work the council's putting in. The next thing I w- just wanna say is, and I guess I'm saying this, uh, and I said it before we're gonna have a very large, peaceful protest on March 28th, and the police are commending everyone in Santa Monica, and we're commending them for the hard work they're gonna be doing. Please get involved. Come out with your family to the Palisades Park at eleven AM at Montana and Ocean Av- Avenue. Bring your family. There's, uh... Go to nokings.org, and you'll see all the things that we're doing to promote extra safety and cooperation. But come out, and let's make it the largest ever. I mean all I can say is thank you for your dedication, and on with the meeting.

[Speaker 9]: Thank you. Mr. Foster.

[Speaker 11]: Uh, whose is this? Is this, uh... Okay. Hello, Jonathan Foster. I said I would uh, speak about Jerry Rubin. He did a vigil for Renee Good, uh, ramming the ICE uh, with a SUV, and that's, that's kinda nice, I guess. Uh, I feel that way in general about citizens. Uh, she's a pretty misled person. Uh, I was wondering if he was going to do a vigil for Jamil Shaw Jr., shot in the face by a dreamer, Pedro Espinoza or if he was gonna do a vigil for the recent murder by an illegal alien. Brian Rodriguez killed eight-year-old Aria Asencio. Her dad is active duty Marine Oscar Asencio, and they had to amputate his leg. He's pretty much, you know, brain dead. Not, not brain dead, but he's got major brain injuries and incoherent. His two kids are completely shaken up, two sons. His wife's foot's broken, had a, a a contusion, a break. I think that's the right word. His wife's hurt pretty badly. They, they might be mentioned today at the State of the Union. And this, this whole embodiment in California that says illegal aliens should be able to stay here, the sanctuary state crap, your daughters should die. You should have your leg amputated. You should have brain injuries, and then we should arrest you and prosecute you and sentence you to jail for life. Why his daughter? It should have been your daughters, and really, no one should be dying from people not lawfully permitted in the USA at all. This is several police officers shot by illegal aliens, and nobody seems to care at all about a single police officer but Jonathan, the chief of police. I ran against Donald John Trump because he won't arrest the state of California. I would've already arrested this place would be arrested. You seven would be in prison. I would have you all locked up. You people are disgusting. The people that do this is disgusting.

[Speaker 9]: Okay, Lawrence Cohen, Samantha Mota, Bryce Cooper, and Joe DeRosa. Mr., um, Cohen, before you come up, I know you have a, you have a-- Do you have a video also?

[Speaker 12]: I do have a video.

[Speaker 9]: Okay.

[Speaker 12]: Uh, can you see me?

[Speaker 9]: Okay.

[Speaker 12]: Can you hear me?

[Speaker 9]: Yes. Oh.

[Speaker 12]: I can't hear myself. I forgot to wear my hearing aids. Um, I'm feeling very emotional standing here tonight. Right now, in DC, Epstein survivors are at the State of the Union and on April 12th we are going to do the world's first event to stand for survivors, to celebrate their courage, their resilience. It's gonna happen here in Santa Monica, and I'd like to see how this all started by directing your attention to the screen please. Th-

[Speaker 8]: Hi, my name is Summer Willis. When I was nineteen years old, I was sexually assaulted, and I stayed silent for a decade. But when I turned twenty-nine, I decided to run twenty-nine marathons and in doing those runs, I found my strength, my resilience, and community and that is exactly what we're hoping to do with the dinner runs this April during Sexual Assault Awareness Month in Santa Monica. Can't wait to see you all there.

[Speaker 12]: And, and what Summer didn't say in that video, when we first started working together, she was shy. She could barely get a word out, and after she finished those twenty-nine marathons, uh, she rallied the support of Texas legislators to adopt the first law in Texas history to, uh, define consent for people who've been sexually assaulted. So it's a miracle if I, if-

[Speaker 13]: ... she knew then what I know n- now about her. Uh, it's just been quite a miraculous journey. So a, a few things I wanna say. Well, I have eighteen seconds. One, I wanna thank the Laemmle theaters 'cause they're giving us a, um, a minute and a half of screen time for every movie for the month leading up to our event. Two, we just got the support of a, um, a major social media influencer, 2.2 million followers. She's coming now.

[Speaker 14]: Fantastic. Thank you. Um, Samantha Motta Bryce Cooper, Joe DeRosa.

[Speaker 15]: Hello, city council members, city staff and community members. My name is Samantha Motta, and I'm a candidate running for the thirty-seventh Congressional District. I'm here to urge city council to amend AB 551 into the city's zoning ordinance to support policy development, community needs assessments, and then to improve local food systems and promote regenerative agricultural practices. It will aid in the reinforcement and strengthening of plans, policies, and programs set forth by Santa Monica. It is a response to the commercial and residential development that threatens to engulf millions of acres of state lands which will be consumed by urban development. In the past decade, there were more than forty-eight thousand four hundred and ninety eligible vacant lots across LA County's eighty-eight cities. Why not be one of them? Like many other municipalities, there is observed and recorded neglected land that remains blighted and squandered for years. As servants, it is our responsibilities to support policies and programs that improve our communities and neighborhoods. Instead, our communities are being sold out and privatized in the name of affordable housing. Vacant lots should be utilized for agricultural and animal husbandry purposes to address food apartheid, promote food equity, and accelerate Santa Monica to a, a more equitable, resilient, healthy, and compassionate future. Equally important are the grants and funds provided to cities in California, who establish a comprehensive set of goals, policies, and objectives to support the long-term protection of agricultural lands and put them back into the hands of the community. This is only possible by converting urban land into conservable agrica- agricultural land. This isn't fear or NIMBYism, but a retort to densification and urbanism, all the while having a lack of regenerative and reliable food sources. In 2017, we used to say it's not affordable housing versus urban agriculture. Now, in 2026, at the rate and ineffectiveness of our so-called leaders affordable housing means nothing without an affordable planet. Young activists like myself are frustrated with service-

[Speaker 14]: Claims you want climate resilient cities. Thank you. M- Mr. Cooper?

[Speaker 16]: Council, Mayor, Mr. Chi, um, thank you very much for your time this evening. I'm here to speak in support of the Santa Monica Airport. Um, I'm also here to address the inequity of the Airport Commission in its current composition yet again. I brought this up last meeting that the, uh, commission was basically the second most costly commission to taxpayers. We feel strongly this is due to the lack of professional aviation-related knowledge that it takes to advise you, the council, on very specific aviation-related matters. Much like running an airport and future, even potential closure, these matters really do need to be at least weighed in by professionals with that, uh, experience. It was also explained to Mr. Snell that this is essentially a low-cost committee based on the fact that it's paid out of the airport fund instead of the general fund. It's a very unique, uh, view on that, but this is the exact reason that we, as users of the airport and stakeholders, do need to be represented. This is even more a reason to be represented. Uh, all we ask is that you support an immediate addition to the commission of a person or persons with aviation-related knowledge in management or facilities management of that nature. In closing, there was also a recent independent poll some of you may have seen in the Santa Monica Daily Press, that showed that sixty-three percent of citizens support the airport. Not closure support the airport. Granted, polls can always be interpreted, but this was a rather independent poll. Please pay attention to those results. A lot can change in ten years. Just look what two terms of change can bring in the mind of voters in our national government, let alone our city. Please pay attention to the voters instead of the echo chamber that has become the Airport Commission comprised of persons that are unapologetically using their public position to project personal sentiment. This is what democracy is about. This is not meant to be an echo chamber of people who are anti-airport or pro-park. They're unapologetic about it, which is fine, but the reality is they should not be using their pulpit to influence those decisions especially when related to you, the council members, that make these decisions on behalf of taxpayers. Taxpayers that paid-

[Speaker 14]: Thank you. Uh, Joe DeRosa.

[Speaker 13]: Thank you, city council members. Um, I have two simple requests. Um, there's a lot going on with the beaches as far as making it a national park and removal of the Coastal Commission. I was wondering if you guys could put up, like, an information site that shows the benefits and, like, the negatives, uh, for each of those actions for the public, so this way they can develop an informed opinion. Uh the other one was one I emailed you guys about today, about a parking regulation uh, for parking transparency to prevent bait-and-switch parking. Like you see down at the Sears building down there, where they say ten dollars an hour, and then you park, and it's ten dollars for the first hour and twenty dollars for each additional hour. Since that's been going on over the last five years, we've solely see that area, um, become, uh, a black cloud come over it, and vacancies and less shopping, and it's right next to the pier, it's right next to Santa Monica Place, and they're always out there with those ten dollar signs. And if you look at the reviews for that parking lot, they're always getting screwed with seventy-dollar bills, and it puts a bad taste on local tourism, visitors, or anybody else who parks there who wants to come and it creates a negative feeling for the downtown area. And I think it would be uh, well within the city's, uh standards to put an ordinance that-

[Speaker 5]: ... prevents that type of stuff. Besides that, guys, thank you so much.

[Speaker 0]: Thank you. I appreciate it. We have two phone callers. We have Anthony Jernigan. Ready for the phone callers.

[Speaker 17]: All right, Mr. Jernigan, you can press star six to unmute yourself, and your time will begin when you begin to speak.

[Speaker 0]: Jernigan, you can go ahead.

[Speaker 17]: Hi.

[Speaker 0]: Go ahead. You can begin.

[Speaker 18]: Yes. Hello, can you hear me?

[Speaker 0]: Yes, we can hear you.

[Speaker 18]: Thank you. So, you know, in, uh, speaking to my fellow residents here, a lot of us are starting to feel like we're just completely being left out of the decision-making process in the city. You know, major policies move forward with minimal transparency, key discussions happen without clear explanation, and we're all left wondering, you know, does this council not know what's happening inside its own government? Or are you choosing not to tell us because you think we won't like what we hear? Because frankly, in many cases, residents probably wouldn't but that's not a reason to withhold information. That's a reason to engage with us honestly and transparently. There's this growing perception that decisions are being shaped to satisfy the county, outside interest groups, or even political networks, rather than us, the people who actually live, work, and pay taxes here. Whether that perception is fair or not, it exists because transparency has been let's face it, lacking. This city is not thriving. Homelessness is worse than it has ever been. The strategies implemented so far have not produced a visible improvement. Businesses are leaving. Commercial corridors have vacancies. Employers are questioning whether they can continue operating here. So what is the plan to stop that? What concrete actions are taking to stabilize the local economy? And then there's the fiscal reality. We are hearing more and more about structural deficits and long-term financial strain. Many residents are concerned that this city is drifting toward the brink of bankruptcy. If that's not accurate, then clearly explain the numbers. If it is a risk, tell us what you are going to cut reform, or prioritize to prevent it. The public deserves clarity. We deserve transparency. We des-

[Speaker 17]: That was two minutes.

[Speaker 0]: Okay, Mike Montgomery. Montgomery, are you there?

[Speaker 19]: Yes, I-- Um thank you. Um, members of the council, I'm here tonight as a dad, um, raising my daughter in Santa Monica, and like every parent, I'm constantly asking myself: Is this city getting better for her or worse? And right now, I mean, the, the kind answer is to say, I don't know, but, um based upon what I've seen over the last number of months, I think we're headed down the wrong path. Um, you know, when when we go downtown and see and smell people using drugs in the open, and, you know, and another small business we like is suddenly gone, um, when homelessness keeps growing and you know, we experience real-life threats, um, it doesn't feel like we see clear results. It feels like things are moving in the wrong direction and kind of, kind of like we're, we're stuck. Um you know, what I think worries me most is is, you know, all the problems, and all cities have problems. It's, it's... I think that I just don't understand the plan. I, I don't think most residents do and big decisions get made, like the Ocean Avenue facilities, and families like mine are generally left trying to figure out after the fact what the actual strategy is and who the priority or the, who the priorities are. The people who live here and pay taxes, or is it the outside pressure, whether it's, you know, the county, um you know, the mayor's employer or advocacy groups like Jesse's employer or political relationships? Um, because from where a lot of us sit, it feels like our voices are an afterthought. Um, I think Santa Monica is an amazing place. That's why we're here. Uh, but a lot of parents are worried right now. We're worried about safety, we're worried about the economy and whether we're getting straight answers from this council. So I'm just asking for clear priorities, real transparency, and and leadership that puts the residents of this city first.

[Speaker 17]: And that was two minutes.

[Speaker 0]: Thank you. Uh, that concludes our public comment on, uh, non-agendized items. I, I also wanted to do a quick, uh-- a second point of agenda management. I would like to move the city manager's report up behind, uh, the special agenda items 'cause I think we have a special guest for the city manager's report.

[Speaker 5]: So moved. Second.

[Speaker 0]: Do we need, do we need a, a roll call vote on that?

[Speaker 14]: No, you can just-

[Speaker 0]: Okay.

[Speaker 14]: You can just-

[Speaker 0]: Okay, all those in favor?

[Speaker 5]: Aye.

[Speaker 0]: Aye. Uh, any opposed? No. Okay, great 'cause I, I just wanna accommodate our our furry friend back there. Um, okay. So we are gonna move on to the mayor's highlight, uh, for this month, and, uh, as we have been doing, we're honoring, uh our city-- our amazing city staff, who has been helping to effectuate, uh, this realignment and, uh, rebirth of our city. Uh, and if we could call forward Grace uh, Kitson, Sasha Sergeant, Claire Caldera, Rosie Cruz, Nia Engel, uh Gilberto Sanchez, Laurel Byers. Don't be shy. Maybe they're not here. Um, Shelley Goings, Rebecca Ortiz, Merle Wynn Jennifer Yazzie, Richard Slagowski. Slagoski, sorry. Samantha Sinka, and Amy Lee. Um, I... You can, you-- if, if one of you wants to say something, that's great. I'm just gonna read off why we're recognizing you, and then we'll take a, a quick picture, and I just super appreciate everyone staying late here today and, and being here. So a, a strong... This is our human resources department. We're honoring them today and, and our wonderful staff and the individuals who make it happen. Uh, a strong city depends on a healthy workforce, and hiring the right people and taking care of our city team is crucial to the success of the realignment plan.... and critical to the work is the amazing team in human resources. During implementation of the realignment plan, HR staff has been continuously recruiting, testing, interviewing onboarding new staff, working super hard and the most recent new employee orientation class reached a record number of over seventy participants. That's amazing. This is a group effort consisting of staff from recruitment, benefits, and training, all working together to get employees hired and onboarded to do the critical work associated with realizing our city's goals. This effort clearly reflects our core values. The team's humility was evident in their collaborative approach and willingness to adapt, learn, and support one another under pressure. Their integrity showed in fair, transparent hiring practices and a focus on doing the work the right way even when the timelines were demanding. The team's motivation drove them to meet ambitious goals while maintaining high standards, and their genuine care for the candidates and new employees ensured that each person felt valued, prepared, and welcomed into the organization. The HR hiring team's work during this period has made a meaningful impact across every single department in the organization and set a strong foundation for future success. Your performance exemplifies excellence in service and commitment to our mission, and you all deserve recognition for a job exceptionally well done. So I just-- I think it's appropriate if we all give a round of applause, and I'm gonna come forward with some commendations. Okay, we'll do a-- Does anyone wanna say anything?

[Speaker 20]: I will.

[Speaker 0]: Oh, Dina.

[Speaker 20]: Thank you guys so much. Um, as you can see, this is a really large number of HR staff here, and what that represents is that it's not just one team. It-- There's so many pieces to hiring, recruiting, and hiring, examining, uh onboarding. I mean, we've got people here who are, you know, on the HRIS team. I mean, there's so many pieces that go along with getting some of the butt in the seat, as they say. And so I can't tell you how proud I am of them and how, you know they've, they've not complained at all. They've just banded together and done the work. So thank you so much for recognizing them today.

[Speaker 0]: Uh, you guys wanna take-- Are you gonna take some notes? No. Yeah, take them out. Oh. Take them out, 'cause I think we'll- It's a nicer picture. Yeah, we'll go out there with the picture. Yes. Hi, hi, hi. Come on over. Hi. Thank you.

[Speaker 21]: We'll take the-

[Speaker 0]: If you can leave the yellow envelopes here-

[Speaker 21]: Oh, okay.

[Speaker 0]: - I'll get them for you.

[Speaker 21]: Okay.

[Speaker 0]: Um, you can come up after. You guys wanna... We're gonna take a picture. Thank you. Hi, hi. Yes, of course. Thank you. You guys are doing hard work. Thank you, thank you, thank you. Hi, hi hi.

[Speaker 21]: Madam Mayor, before we take the picture, can we request that Sarah be part of the photo also?

[Speaker 0]: One, two.

[Speaker 20]: Thank you. Thank you.

[Speaker 0]: Okay. Now, we will-- I'm very excited to commend Santa Monica's first Black firefighter, um, if our fire department wants to come up, uh, and we're gonna do a commendation, uh, for Eddie Davis. We'll just give them a moment to walk on over. We're, we're on a schedule here, uh Chief Halleck, so get your, get your boys, let's go, and girls and people. Okay, I'm gonna start reading, so we can maximize our, our time here. Is, is Mr. Davis here?

[Speaker 5]: No, he's passed, but his, uh, widow is-

[Speaker 0]: Okay.

[Speaker 5]: She's in the restroom, so...

[Speaker 0]: Oh, okay. Well, let us, um, let us then move to Women's History Month really quickly. Is that okay? But appreciate that everyone's ready. Um sorry. Who's, who-- Uh, if we could have the, the folks who are here for Women's History Month, um, Barbara Jacobson. Uh I'm gonna read the proclamation, and then Ms. Jacobson... T- city team, is Ms. Jacobson here? Okay, um, we will move on to Kidney Awareness Month. Is Dr. Rastogi, the Clinical Chief of Nephrology at UCLA Health and the Bruin Beans Health Club here? I see lo-- We love our Bruins. Come on up. Um so I'm gonna go ahead and read our Kidney Awareness Month proclamation, and then if you want to say a, a few brief words then, and we'll take a photo. Uh, so March is nationalized, uh, recognized nationally as Kidney Awareness Month, a time dedicated to raising awareness about kidney health and the prevention of kidney disease, a serious and often silent public health issue affecting millions of Americans, and one in three adults in the United States is at risk of developing kidney disease. One in seven adults currently lives with the disease, and only one in ten individuals with kidney disease is aware they have it, due to the frequently in-- asymptomatic nature in its early stages. Risk factors for kidney disease include diabetes, high blood pressure, age, medications such as ibuprofen, family history, making education and early detection critical tools in preventing progression and saving lives. And whereas early diagnosis through simple blood and urine tests combined with timely intervention and guideline-directed therapies, can significantly slow the progression of kidney disease and improve health outcomes. And whereas the Green Ribbon campaign, led in partnership with the Bruin Beans Health Club at the University of California, Los Angeles, my alma mater and the Core Kidney Program, works to increase public awareness, promote screening, and advocate for kidney health education within the Santa Monica communities. And whereas the City of Santa Monica recognizes the importance of supporting public health initiatives that empower residents with knowledge, encourage preventative care, and position our community as a leader in health advocacy. Um, so our whole council is declaring, uh the month of March as, uh, Kidney Awareness Month, and we're asking all residents to-... seek appropriate screening, support the Green Ribbon campaign, and joins- join us in raising awareness. And so if you wanted to give a couple remarks, we'll then take a photo.

[Speaker 22]: Yeah. Thank you. Thank you, Mayor, and uh, I'm a kidney specialist at UCLA Health, and I have this, my undergraduate club. So I just wanna point out that there's a connection between kidney health awareness and Santa Monica. We used to do the Kidney Fair at the Beach, um, at, at Santa Monica Beach, and, and the last one was 2019, and, uh, it's been a big part of our campaign. And all that I ask is that a simple blood test and urine test can diagnose you. There are 100,000 people waiting on the kidney transplant list, so also organ donation awareness is something that we really focus on. So I just want to thank everybody for having us over here. Thank you. You wanna say something?

[Speaker 5]: You wanna say anything? You wanna say anything?

[Speaker 23]: Uh, just a couple quick words.

[Speaker 5]: Okay.

[Speaker 23]: Um, hi, everyone. My name is Simran Oblaker.

[Speaker 5]: Hi, everyone. My name is Rain Wong.

[Speaker 23]: And we are the co-presidents of the Bruin Beans Health Club over at UCLA. We work in partnership with the CORE Kidney Program and we just wanna thank you for letting us come back here a second year in a row. We were here last year to proclaim March as Kidney Disease Awareness Month.

[Speaker 22]: Thank you.

[Speaker 23]: So thank you so much for bringing us back here.

[Speaker 22]: Thank you so much.

[Speaker 5]: Oh, of course. Let's take a photo.

[Speaker 24]: Um, oh, Mayor, may I share a quick story? I mean, well-

[Speaker 5]: Yes!

[Speaker 24]: Yeah.

[Speaker 5]: Go ahead.

[Speaker 24]: Um, so I shared this story last year as well, but one of my friends, uh, her late husband had been diagnosed with, uh kidney disease in the early 2000s, and when he was diagnosed, he was about ten minutes away from full renal failure. And unfortunately, this is something that happens to a lot of folks who experience kidney disease because the symptoms are very easy to mistake for something else. Um she had actually ended up being able to become a kidney donor to her husband in 2009, and he unfortunately did pass away in 2023, but that meant he was able to get an extra 14 years with her, with their pets, with his grandchildren, with their children. And so thank you so much for being here to share, to share awareness and I, I really appreciate it. Thank you.

[Speaker 22]: Thank you.

[Speaker 5]: ... Council member. Okay, we're gonna go in the row and take the photo, if you guys wouldn't mind.

[Speaker 24]: Amazing.

[Speaker 5]: In here. We can... Here, come on through. It's not a competition.

[Speaker 24]: So I brought three pressures.

[Speaker 5]: Let's go all the way to the back. All of you are part of the club? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Okay.

[Speaker 24]: Tallest people towards-

[Speaker 5]: So much more professional than I was. Thank you for coming here. Yeah, yeah, yeah. My sister's also a doctor in UCLA. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Thank you for being here. Appreciate it.

[Speaker 0]: Okay. Um, I think we'll... Yay, I'm getting the thumbs up sign. We're gonna go back to our lovely firefighters. Um so we wanna have a commendation for Eddie Davis. He was Santa Monica's first Black firefighter, and I understand his family is here. So if we, if you all wanna come up, uh, to, to the, to the mic, I will start reading the commendation. Um, so whereas Eddie Davis holds a lasting place in the history of Santa Monica as the city's first Black firefighter and a trailblazer who helped open doors in a profession that has long excluded people of color, and whereas in 1965, during a period of deep racial tension and significant societal change, excuse me social change across the nation, he joined the Santa Monica Fire Department at a time when integration required extraordinary courage, resilience, and quiet determination. And whereas serving during the racially charged 1960s, Mr. Davis persevered through adversity and discrimination with professionalism and integrity, demonstrating unwavering commitment to protecting the residents of Santa Monica. And whereas over the course of a long and dedicated career, he earned the respect of his colleagues and the community, becoming a well-liked firefighter known for his service character, and leadership. And whereas the legacy of Eddie Davis is one not only of honorable public service, but of meaningful progress, reminding us that institutions evolve because individuals are willing to step forward, endure resistance, and remain committed to excellence. Uh, and I would just say it's so fitting that we're honoring, uh, him during Black History Month. Uh, so important, so thank you all for being here. Now, uh, we, as the City of Santa Monica, hereby commend Eddie Davis for his historic service, enduring impact, uh, on the advancement of equity and opportunity within the fire service, and his lasting contributions to the City of Santa Monica. And I don't know if anyone wants to say a few words while we come down and present the proclamation. Don't be shy! It's your time to shine.

[Speaker 25]: To my right is my mother, Annie H. Davis firefighter Davis's wife. I am Red Davis his, uh, baby boy. On behalf of our family uh, there's four generations standing behind me, by the way. We thank you for this wonderful honor, and I'm gonna keep it brief. Thank you very much.

[Speaker 0]: Thank you.

[Speaker 25]: You wanna say something, Ma?

[Speaker 22]: You know what? I'd just like to say that, um it was nice while he was there. We would have dinners that sometimes I would cook and take to them while he was working. And I miss everybody because I have met some very nice young ladies there.

[Speaker 26]: ... and we would go and have the wives' meetings and everything was always so nice because they would tell me what was happening. And I'm a registered nurse, so I wouldn't be free all the time, but they would keep me up on what was going on. And my husband, he was something else. And I, I am so proud of him, and I'm so proud to know that someone else think he's worthy of giving a word of honor to because he would do anything for anybody.

[Speaker 5]: Mm.

[Speaker 26]: That's just the type of man he was. But he was also a Christian man. So the way it goes.

[Speaker 0]: ... Are we okay to go get-- Does she wanna get-- Are you okay to go there for a picture?

[Speaker 27]: Let's put her in the chair.

[Speaker 0]: Yeah, of course.

[Speaker 27]: Have a seat, Mom. We're gonna take a couple photos. Excellent. Let me get it. Okay. All right, got it.

[Speaker 26]: Oh, excuse me.

[Speaker 21]: Go ahead and get-

[Speaker 27]: Okay.

[Speaker 21]: Okay. Um, can we have the family come forward, and then walk and then-

[Speaker 5]: Already done that. You did all right. You killed it, too.

[Speaker 0]: Severity.

[Speaker 27]: I recorded it, so I think we'll put it through here.

[Speaker 5]: Yeah, yeah.

[Speaker 21]: Yay, we have a woman! Okay. Um, I'm right here. Okay there you go. Everyone look at ... Okay. Great. All right, thank you.

[Speaker 5]: Why weren't you in there? Nice job, man.

[Speaker 21]: Thank you guys.

[Speaker 5]: Yeah.

[Speaker 21]: Thank you. Let's, um...

[Speaker 0]: Okay, amazing. Um, is our, our fri-- our Barbara Jacobson here?

[Speaker 28]: Yeah.

[Speaker 0]: Fantastic. So we, uh, M- March, coming up in a few days here, is Women's History Month. So we are gonna proclaim the month of March, uh, as Women's History Month and I'm gonna read the proclamation, and then Ms. Jacobson, if you wanna say a couple brief words. Um, so Women's History Month and International Women's Day are observed each March to recognize and celebrate the enduring and transformative contribution of women to communities, the arts, technological innovation, and the advancement of social, economic, and political progress. City of Santa Monica recognizes the ongoing importance of gender equity, inclusion, and respect for women of all identities, as well as allies, in creating a more just compassionate, and thriving community for all. And whereas this marks the thirty-ninth an- annual observance of Women's History Month in the United States and the hundred and fifteenth International Women's Day, the women in the city of Santa Monica honor and build upon the legacy of those who came before whose efforts helped pave the way towards a more equitable and progressive future. And women have historically served and continue to serve at all levels of government, including elected office leadership, staff positions, emergency services, and public safety. Uh, and whereas a diverse-- as a diverse community, we come together to harness our collective strength to advance a more just and equitable society and commemorate Women's History Month. So on behalf of the City Council, we are proclaiming the month of, month of March as Women's History Month in Santa Monica, and we are encouraging all women of all identities and allies, residents, and visitors to come together to honor the past, celebrate the present, and help shape a more equitable and inclusive future for all. So, uh, if you would like to make a few remarks.

[Speaker 28]: Sure. So thank you so much. I really appreciate you all taking the time to acknowledge, uh, Women's History Month and, uh, International Women's Day. Uh especially at this time, um, where we are uh, it's really important that we continue to, uh, continue moving forward especially in leadership and everything that we're doing as a city. Um, it really helps to move the momentum forward, so thank you very much. Yeah. I don't have as many people, but

[Speaker 0]: No, no, no. Let's take a picture.

[Speaker 5]: Okay, let's go.

[Speaker 21]: We got some other ladies.

[Speaker 5]: Okay. Oh, that was-- I didn't wanna do by ourselves.

[Speaker 28]: Welcome.

[Speaker 21]: Yeah, great. We love women. Women and allies.

[Speaker 28]: If you can take one step back, please.

[Speaker 21]: Yeah. No, it's fine. You got it. Okay, okay, okay. Ready? One, two, three. Perfect. Thank you.

[Speaker 28]: Thank you.

[Speaker 21]: Thank you.

[Speaker 28]: Thanks. See you later.

[Speaker 27]: Hey Barbara-

[Speaker 28]: Yeah.

[Speaker 27]: Which department do you work in?

[Speaker 28]: Mobility.

[Speaker 0]: Oh, sweet. Okay.

[Speaker 28]: Yeah, cool.

[Speaker 0]: Nice to meet you.

[Speaker 28]: Bye. Take care.

[Speaker 0]: Uh, before we move on, I think we have a a guest that's been very patiently waiting. Um, so we're gonna move the s- as we decided, the city manager's report to next- Al, go ahead.

[Speaker 1]: Thank you. Thank you, Madam Mayor, members of the City Council. We have, um, a much more interesting and exciting City Manager's update for everyone this evening. Um, before we get to the start of the City Manager's report this, um tonight, um, a couple of quick things to let the council and community know about. Um, first off, um, did anyone watch the NBA All-Star Game last week at Intuit just up the street? Um, was a new format to the game. We saw some interesting things happen on the court. Um, what happened off the court was also super interesting. Did you know that the NBA designated Santa Monica as the location for all of the NBA All-Stars? Um, the Regent Hotel was identified as the location that all of the NBA All-Star players and NBA personnel stayed at. Santa Monica was their base of operation. Um our team at the police department did a great job keeping things under wrap, while they also coordinated a bunch of security-related efforts with the NBA. Public works team did a great job keeping downtown looking terrific, um, with a special shine as we had this terrific event coordinated in the region. And really, with so many sporting events coming up the next couple of years, um, it was really cool internally to know Santa Monica's still a place people want to be when there are big events in the region. We're looking forward to more to come as we move into the next couple of years. Um, a couple other things, NBA All-Star Game may have come and gone, but as we come up to this next weekend, there's a ton of cool stuff happening in Santa Monica. First, the Frieze Art Festival is coming back to town and the region at Santa Monica Airport. That'll start this Thursday, February 26th. The 11th Annual Black History Greens Festival will also be held at Virginia Avenue Park this Saturday from 11:00 to 4:00. We'll also be wrapping up Black History Month, um, this Saturday with a movie screening at the main library, and a dance performance created around the public art at Historic Belmar Park. A couple other fun things, if you're into morning yoga, this coming Saturday, phase three of our Santa Monica Dunes project kicks off. Um, we will be doing a morning yoga and restoration event in partnership with the Bay Foundation. We also have, um a special event at Main Street Farmers Market this coming Sunday, as well as the Julia Morgan Legacy Day at Annenberg Community Beach House. Please log on to santamonica.gov/events for more details. Um, we've been talking the last couple of meetings that maybe one of these days, um as we introduce our adoptable pet of the meeting, we might be meeting those pets in person. I see Rob coming up with our team from the animal shelter, and today, instead of just a picture, we wanted to introduce everyone in person to Colonel, a two-and-a-half-year-old Shepherd Husky mix. He loves going for walks, playing catch or playing with stuffies in the yard, and exploring. Um everyone, take a look. He is here in the council chambers. We hope the council will come and take a look. We hope somebody out there sees Colonel, decides that Colonel needs to be part of their family. Please contact the animal shelter if you're interested in meeting him, and as always, you can visit the Santa Monica Animal Shelter Foundation website to make a donation or shop from the Chewy wish list. Colonel, welcome to our council meeting. You are the star of the evening.

[Speaker 2]: Wait, are you gonna say something?

[Speaker 3]: If you'd like. Uh, good evening. Good evening, Mayor and Council, Mr. City Manager. Um, thank you for having us, and as, uh, Mr. Chief said this is Colonel. He was surrendered to the shelter on January 2nd of this year so he's been with us for about two months. Uh playful, as you can see. Uh, he's been in council chambers now for an hour with us in the back, and, uh, behaving very nicely in, in, uh, in public. So, um, what we know about him from his owners that surrendered is that he, uh, very playful likes to play with his toys, likes to go for walks, gets along with other dogs. Uh he, he, uh... Yeah, I mean, he's, he's a Husky Shepherd mix, so he, you know, has a lot of energy and, um we have a lot of great dogs at the shelter and a lot of, uh, great animals, and we're, uh, hoping that people can come and help us out by adopting, uh, uh, Colonel and, and every other animal that we have. And, uh, yeah, thank you so much for having us.

[Speaker 0]: Awesome. Let's see. Yeah.

[Speaker 2]: You guys want to meet him at all?

[Speaker 3]: Here's your puppy.

[Speaker 2]: Who needs a dog?

[Speaker 0]: Ready? One, two, three. One, two-

[Speaker 4]: Thank you. Great.

[Speaker 0]: Who's, who's adopting him here?

[Speaker 4]: He's so sweet.

[Speaker 3]: We can do the paperwork tonight.

[Speaker 0]: Yeah.

[Speaker 4]: Thank you. Thank you.

[Speaker 0]: Come visit.

[Speaker 4]: I will. I will.

[Speaker 0]: Colonel's providing emotional support to everyone here today. Um, okay, amazing. We're now gonna move on to public input under, uh, consent calendar items, and we have, um, one, one, uh, Andrea, and then I think we do have one on the phone. Mary's keeping us clean there.

[Speaker 1]: Thank you.

[Speaker 5]: Hello again. My name is Andrea McPherson. I spoke about my extenuating circumstances due to lack of proper care of the EMTs of Long Beach. Basically, EMTs need, uh better communication equipment to receive patients' private information to help save lives. I gave the secretary my ID bracelet that contains information about my chronic illness. It, uh, it is easily accessible and complete with a QR code and if it's scanned, all info automatically pulls up on the screen. Um the most positive thing that has happened throughout that extenuating circumstance uh, is throughout that whole, um situation, I received an ANA blood-... test, and it diagnosed me with lupus. And um, it explained why my kidneys, um, were bothering me, and that is why I support Kidney Awareness Month. That's very important. But now I know why I'm in so much pain, and dangerously low electrolytes as well. But please think about working with, uh, the proper medical professionals to make disabled people seniors, and disabled children safer by even placing, um, the key chains on their backpacks. That's a great idea, guys. Think about it. And, um, I approve this motion, but please give the, um, EMTs updates on proper protocol having to do with major chronic illnesses like epilepsy. Placing people on their sides instead of on their backs, and just all kinds of just different things, updating um, proper information for EMTs, new and old. Thank you so much.

[Speaker 2]: Thank you so much, um-

[Speaker 5]: And the bracelet, I gave it to the secretary. If you guys just wanna take a look at it really quickly, it, it's a ID bracelet with a QR code. And then, uh, I'm gonna get out of here as soon as you guys take a look at it.

[Speaker 2]: I would love to see it.

[Speaker 5]: I'll take it.

[Speaker 2]: That's our clerk. Um-

[Speaker 6]: Thank you.

[Speaker 2]: Thank you. We also have Denise, uh Barton. Go ahead, Denise.

[Speaker 7]: Hello, can you hear me?

[Speaker 2]: Yes, we can hear you.

[Speaker 7]: Okay.

[Speaker 2]: Go ahead.

[Speaker 7]: Good evening. This is Denise Barton on item 4H. Would this be our city council and mayor trying to make DI hires look competent for their positions, was it when they can't properly execute their positions? I ask because haven't you had a program like this at the Santa Monica Airport? How's that going? And don't you think you need to better-- but you need better results before you expand it citywide? You know, the Los Angeles Grand Jury has previously found Santa Monica to be one of the most financially mismanaged cities, but this city council carries on that reputation. Oh, and is the Human Services Department still posting receipts of funds any quicker than one hundred to two hundred days after receipt? It all goes along with the city the city wanting to make as m- the city, city staff wanting to make as much money as they can, doing as little as they can. Thank you.

[Speaker 2]: Thank you, Ms. Barton. Uh, we will now move on to, uh, the consent calendar. Uh and I, I understand that item 4D has been pulled. Uh, and w- is anyone recusing themselves from anything under the consent calendar? Okay, I see no recusals. Do I want to hear a motion for everything but 4D?

[Speaker 6]: So moved.

[Speaker 8]: Second.

[Speaker 2]: Great.

[Speaker 5]: I'm sorry, was that Council Member Negrete? Okay.

[Speaker 2]: And Zernatskaya second, yeah.

[Speaker 5]: Council Member Zernatskaya?

[Speaker 8]: Yes.

[Speaker 5]: Council Member Snell?

[Speaker 8]: Yes.

[Speaker 5]: Mayor Pro Tem Schwilk?

[Speaker 8]: Yes.

[Speaker 5]: Council Member Raskin?

[Speaker 9]: Yes.

[Speaker 5]: Council Member Hall?

[Speaker 8]: Yes.

[Speaker 5]: Council Member Negrete?

[Speaker 6]: Yes.

[Speaker 5]: And Mayor Terroses.

[Speaker 2]: Yes. Okay, that carries. We will now hear 4D, uh, and Council Member Zernatskaya, I believe you pulled that, so are you asking for a staff report?

[Speaker 6]: Uh, no, I, I don't need a staff report. I just wanted to ask, uh, Mr. Santiago a quick question or two about some of the restrictions of our investment policy just so that the public can, um understand what limitations we have as a government entity within, uh, how, you know, on how we invest. Um, so I, I don't know-

[Speaker 10]: Good evening, Council and Mayor.

[Speaker 6]: Hi.

[Speaker 10]: Hi.

[Speaker 6]: Thank you so much for being here, Mr. Santiago.

[Speaker 10]: Sure.

[Speaker 6]: Uh, so I, I noticed that in our investment policy, it stated that we have, uh, we had a divestment of Russia-based investments due to the Russia-Ukraine war beginning in twenty twenty-two. Um, can you please confirm whether that's still the case, and if there is any state laws that also affect that?

[Speaker 10]: That is still the case. It was, um, a policy that council implemented in twenty twenty-two, so we're still observing that policy. And we, um, we divested some of our investments. The ones that we have are insurance, um, type of investments, so we can't really tie them to, um, Russia investments or anything like that, uh specifically, but we have, um, you know kind of d- divested from the other investments.

[Speaker 6]: Okay, thank you.

[Speaker 10]: Yeah.

[Speaker 6]: And, um, last year when we went over this I believe we had added a probi- prohibition on cryptocurrency and crypto-related investments. Uh, but could you please confirm if there is now also California-level, um, code that prohibits municipal governments from investing in these types of investments?

[Speaker 10]: Yes. Uh, California Government Code prohibits it.

[Speaker 6]: Okay. Thank you.

[Speaker 10]: It prohibits, um, crypto-related investments and cryptocurrency.

[Speaker 6]: Okay. And-

[Speaker 10]: It's on page eight of our, um, policy as well.

[Speaker 6]: Perfect. Um, and... Sorry, go ahead.

[Speaker 10]: Yeah.

[Speaker 6]: Oh, uh, um, and last question. Uh, could you please clarify what w- what our investment policy means when it comes to socially responsible investing?

[Speaker 10]: So we, uh, prioritize investments that are, um, categorized as social, um social, uh, government investing, I believe. Um, and so we- they're categorized because they, the money that's used, the proceeds, are used for, um for, uh, social causes. And so those investments are, are categorized, and they're also... Uh, there's ratings that categorize the investments. And so our investment advisor, um, understands the policy, so when they, um, when they, um recommend investments, they make sure that we kinda look at those investments first and then we assess the, uh, returns with uh, safety principle and all that stuff when we're making decisions on our investments. But that's one of the categories that we look at.

[Speaker 6]: Thank you. And, and the priorities, the priority in general for our investment portfolio is to preserve capital, um-

[Speaker 10]: Safety, liquidity-

[Speaker 6]: Okay

[Speaker 10]: ... first, and then re- a rate of return.

[Speaker 6]: Okay, perfect. Thank you so much. Um, if nobody else has any other questions, I'm happy to move this item.

[Speaker 5]: I-

[Speaker 2]: Great.

[Speaker 11]: ... I'll second it. Thank you.

[Speaker 8]: Thank you so much, Mr. Santiago.

[Speaker 11]: Okay, Council Member Zarnestkyaya?

[Speaker 12]: Yes.

[Speaker 11]: Council Member Snell? Yes. Mayor Pro Tem Zwick?

[Speaker 8]: Yes.

[Speaker 11]: Council Member Raskin?

[Speaker 8]: Yes.

[Speaker 11]: Council Member Hall?

[Speaker 8]: Yes.

[Speaker 11]: Council Member Negrete?

[Speaker 13]: Yes.

[Speaker 11]: Mayor Terrosis?

[Speaker 2]: Yes. Fantastic. Um, we will now move on, uh, to public input on the remaining agenda items. Um and oh-

[Speaker 11]: Before we do that, I'd like to ask if any council members have anything to report on travel-

[Speaker 2]: Thank you

[Speaker 11]: ... since, since the last council meeting?

[Speaker 2]: Okay.

[Speaker 12]: Sorry. Um, this past weekend I was at the Independent Cities Association. I serve on the executive board. It was in Santa Barbara. Um, it was great, collaborated with other beach cities, inland cities. Um, sessions ranged from, um, how to generate revenue in your cities without taxing residents, um, creating, um, tax increment financing districts cybersecurity, um, tech, et cetera. But the biggest, um, takeaway was Coastal Commission. Not only speaking to the members there and the chair, but building those relationships, which has resulted in, um, Coastal Commission coming for a meeting here on Friday, and, um, more meetings with our city manager's office. So, um, yeah, that was Independent Cities Association, and, um, that was this past weekend in Santa Barbara.

[Speaker 2]: Great. Um, that sounds fantastic. Um we're gonna move on now to public input on remaining agenda items. Jerry Rubin... With the exception of the public hearing item. Jerry Rubin, Luke Kane, Peter Whelan, Carol Valen, Connor Webb.

[Speaker 14]: Uh, before I begin, uh, I wanted to speak on the sixteen item. Is that-

[Speaker 2]: Yes, you may do that.

[Speaker 14]: That's the one now?

[Speaker 2]: Yep.

[Speaker 14]: Well I must say I was, uh, very pleased to see this is on the agenda. I wanna thank, uh Council Member Negrete and, uh, Mayor Pro Tem Zwick for doing this, because it's so timely and so positive that it's something everyone can get behind and I think every business is going to appreciate it, especially the smaller businesses and the dining people. You know, just as an aside, I hope this isn't too much off the subject, and everyone has a right to their own opinion but when I heard these phone call public put downs of Santa Monica, I thought "I'm not seeing that," and I go to the Promenade a lot. It doesn't smell bad it's clean, it's wonderful, and all the challenges are gonna be overcome and all the great events and everything. So I urge everyone to understand that, and how everyone's working together to see that, and how everyone's understanding how important it is to get people out there. The weather is good, we wanna be out, we wanna be visible and I just wanna thank you for doing this and it's great to live in Santa Monica.

[Speaker 2]: Thank you, Jerry. Uh, Luke Kane, then Peter Whelan.

[Speaker 13]: Good evening, Mayor, good evening Council. Um, you may have received an email from me, um, this week regarding the wastewater management fee and the waste uh, the mitigation fees. Um, I work in leasing. I've been trying to lease the Promenade for six years. I'm deeply invested into this city. I grew up here rent-controlled tenant. Um, you know, my family have the Britannia Pub. We've been in business nearly thirty years at this point and, um, you know, I've-- for the first time in a long time, it's felt like things are finally starting to come back. Um you know, the weather's been great this year. We're off to... I, I honestly thought it was gonna happen last year, um but with the fires and everything slowed us down. Um you know, you guys have done a tremendous job kind of spearheading things like tearing down some of the red tape with uh, you know, opening, you know, any type of business on the Promenade. But I just do wanna make note of, um, one of the issues that I'm running into, and it's the first time I've ever seen this, where a tenant is willing to take a retail space and convert it to a restaurant space. The level of investment with that is a lot these days. Um, we have these fees in place like thirteen, like, like fourteen hundred dollars a seat, per new seat. Like, if you convert a retail space say it's fifty seats, that's seventy Gs right off the bat, that you-- like, to get your permits, you have to pay that. Um, I think with all the work that you guys are doing, it's kinda almost all for naught if we don't waive those fees. Um, again like things are coming back, like, we can't afford a misstep, and I really believe that. Um, anything you guys can do to waive these fees would be a tremendous help to not only, like, the b- uh, real estate people like myself, but my family all these other tenants on the street. Maybe they're thinking about expanding maybe they're thinking about opening up a new location. You know, I just don't wanna impede on that. You guys have done a tremendous job, like, really spearheading some of this stuff, so let's make it count. You know what I mean? So-

[Speaker 2]: Thank you-

[Speaker 13]: Thank you. Appreciate it

[Speaker 2]: ... so much, and we did receive your email.

[Speaker 13]: Thank you.

[Speaker 2]: Um Peter Whelan Carol... Oh, yeah, great.

[Speaker 8]: How's it going? My name is Peter Whelan. I'm the facilities director for the LA Cargo Auto Group. I'm here on behalf of my boss, Mike Sullivan. We own twelve dealerships, seven of which are in the city of Santa Monica, and we employ roughly four hundred and fifty people here. In the last six or seven years we've s- we've, we've put in excess of fifty million dollars into the restructuring of our facilities here in Santa Monica. Um-... in some talks with some of your s- staff, uh, transportation and, and, uh, code enforcement, w- I learned that we were doing this w- very late, that we were, that there was a safety study, uh, on Santa Monica Boulevard, and th- there, there, there's d- uh uh, they're recommending removing the ability to turn left into our facility or onto Park Drive. Uh, I feel that's sort of burdens on, on us. Um, there's some other things as well. That bike path's gonna remove some parking. I know you're doing work on Broadway, which we can't really talk about here, but that's gonna remove parking around our area. Uh, and while I'd be a fool to sit here and say I don't want safety, because that's what Item 11A is about, um, I, I do want, and I do uh I, I, I wanna support that item, but I wanna have a discussion about the ability as to how it im- or the ability to, to access our facility. Um, and so I would ask that you just y- y- approve the safety functions, but let's have a little chat about how we get in and out of our site. Okay? We've sent you a letter, uh, via email. Uh, I hope you get that, and take a minute to read that, um, uh, and see where we can go from here. But I'd really appreciate the ability to have a little conversation, uh, about that. I think that their response to that no left turn is an extraordinary, uh, action to take for a minimal issue. So thanks, guys.

[Speaker 2]: Thank you. We also got your email. Um Carol?

[Speaker 15]: Good evening, Council. I'm Carol Blaine. I'm here to speak on Item 11A, shocker. Uh, first, I wanna thank all the staff for all the work they put into this project and many other projects. There are many components of this project that I strongly support, and I hope to see soon. One of them is the intersection at Chelsea. This will be such a major improvement for McKinley students and families. I would actually love to see it move to phase one 'cause I think this could have a much stronger impact than other improvements proposed in phase one, and I think we shouldn't wait that long to make it safer. And while I appreciate other components of this project, such as curb extensions far side bus stops, turner restric- turner restrictions, it's hard to believe that this is the best we can do with this amount of time and resources. Staff has done so much great work. It's not uncommon to hear people, um, talk about Santa Monica streets and say that they're much safer than other cities. One thing you don't hear is people think they feel safe on Wilshire Boulevard, and spending $11 million to mostly duplicate what has already been done on Wilshire, where multiple people died last year, seems kind of counterproductive. So I don't mean to take away from all the work that has already been put into this, but when we continue to, to approve projects that kind of feel watered down from the community's perspective, it's kind of hard to believe that we truly take Vision Zero seriously and take Vision Zero seriously, and want to, um, achieve it within our lifetime. So I'm not here to tell you what to do, but I hope you can at least have a meaningful discussion and follow through with your request from last meeting to prioritize safety over throughput and unfounded fears. Thank you.

[Speaker 2]: Thank you so much. Connor Webb?

[Speaker 16]: Good evening, Mayor and, uh, Council. My name is Connor Webb. I'm here to speak on 11A. Um, I, uh, again, wanna just start by saying thank you to all the milli- many talented people, um, that have spent considerable effort and, uh, done a really great job on many aspects of this project. Um, but two weeks ago, Council voted unanimously to acknowledge our failure on Vision Zero, which was our commitment to eliminate deaths and serious injuries on our roads by 2026. That motion called for designs in the public right of way to prioritize human life over all else moving forward. And while the proposed plan has many good recommendations, I do not think it achieves the needed safety required to uh, achieve that goal. And, uh, frankly it seems very similar to the Wilshire changes, uh, which have been proven to be insufficient with multiple region, uh recent tragic deaths. As a Mid-City resident myself, I've nearly been turned into a pink mist multiple times while using those new Wilshire crosswalks. Um, you know, now I walk an extra six minutes out of my way, um, just to, just to cross Wilshire, despite living right next to it. Uh I want everyone on Council to, uh, think if they would allow their young children or nieces, or nephews, or grandchildren to cross those unsignalized intersections alone. 'Cause if the answer is no, I think we need to do better, seriously. And the best part of this plan is that signalized crossing at McKinley Elementary, uh, but it's a later phase item. Um, so please prioritize that signal and, uh, make it a separate near-term priority. Uh, but I think we do need to improve this project overall. Uh, whether that, you know happens after approval, or we lay a clear path forward to getting those improvements done, I think changes do need to be made. Because this is a once in a lifetime, uh opportunity to redesign one of our most dangerous roads in Santa Monica and achieve Vision Zero on it. So agreeing to a plan that is anything but exceptional is, unfortunately, just an agreement to fail on that Vision Zero commitment for decades to come. Thank you.

[Speaker 2]: Thank you. Um, I believe we also have some, um, virtual or phone callers, so Jacob-

[Speaker 11]: Yeah.

[Speaker 2]: Oh.

[Speaker 11]: Mayor, I'm sorry, we have one late speaker, Robbie that just signed up.

[Speaker 2]: Great. Um-

[Speaker 17]: I'll, I'll move that to allow the speaker.

[Speaker 2]: Okay.

[Speaker 8]: Second.

[Speaker 2]: Do we need to vote on that? I... Is anyone opposed to that? Don't see any. Okay. Um Robbie? Ms. Jones?

[Speaker 18]: I saw everybody here. Come down to the courtyard red velvet cake.

[Speaker 2]: Wait, come and tell us about your-- tell us about your- Come over-- Come to the mic, Robbie. Come on.

[Speaker 18]: Okay.

[Speaker 2]: Tell us what you do, why you brought these. We're hungry. We haven't eaten dinner yet.

[Speaker 18]: Oh, well, this is gonna drive you crazy. See?

[Speaker 2]: Oh, my God!

[Speaker 4]: ... Oh, um, just Family Cafe Coffee Bar uh, 1819 Pico Boulevard. I'm the owner, the first Black owner of a coffee bar on Pico.

[Speaker 11]: Mm.

[Speaker 4]: Historically African American property. Uh, but we got these wonderful desserts here. We came here to, um, be, uh present them at the reception for the first Black firefighter, and we have so many left. And we brought a lot, 'cause that's what we do in the South, we make a lot of food.

[Speaker 11]: Okay.

[Speaker 4]: So we got peach cobbler lemon pie, uh, sweet potato pie red velvet cupcakes and pecan pie, pecan cookies. We have everything. Y'all come down to the reception, and this will be in the office for you guys, or you want it right now?

[Speaker 11]: No, I'll take it now.

[Speaker 4]: Okay. But just wanna do a little infomercial. Thank you.

[Speaker 19]: Robbie-

[Speaker 4]: No, we really just wanted you guys to taste-

[Speaker 19]: We'll, we'll take one, Robbie

[Speaker 4]: ... what we have, and everybody come up.

[Speaker 19]: Happy Black History Month.

[Speaker 4]: Thank you.

[Speaker 19]: Um, okay, we have Jacob Wasserman.

[Speaker 11]: Mr. Wasserman, are you there?

[Speaker 20]: Hi, um, this is Jacob Wasserman. I'm commenting on, uh, the Santa Monica Boulevard study. I realize the disadvantage of commenting remotely is that I do not get to have any of that food. Um, real shame there. Um, yeah, I'm a planning commissioner, but speaking for myself. Um this study, it shows a lot of work, but it really, unfortunately, needs to be sent back to the drawing board. And I think particularly, the, the safety issues for pedestrians and bicyclists were raised by previous commenters. I wanna focus us on bus lanes. This corridor is a huge bus corridor. I take the one, um, all the time. There's metro on it as well. Um, we could put a bus lane that would speed up transit for not just all riders, but particularly our most transit-dependent riders, those, um, who can't afford a car. Um, but this report, it, it has, like one partial peak-hour bus lane for a couple blocks, but nothing for the rest of the corridor, where buses poke along in traffic. And I, I just wanna quote one part, it's about the downvote comments, upvote, downvote comment system that they had to gr- gather feedback. They said that the most downvoted comment only had four downvotes but then they said, quote, "It's reflective of disagreements in the community over the idea of reducing the number of drive lanes on Santa Monica Boulevard." Tell me, four downvotes, the most downvoted comment, is that reflective of disagreement? I don't think so. I think that we're just having a situation where some people say they don't want it most people say they want bus lanes, but staff is treating them equally. And I think that your vote when you said that you were gonna commit to Vision Zero, commit to prioritizing transit riders and the lives, the lives and safety of our pedestrians and bicyclists mandates that this study be sent back to the drawing board. There's no funding deadline here. There's no grant. You don't have to approve this tonight. Um unfortunately, a absent full bus lanes or at least something-

[Speaker 11]: Thank you, Mr. Wasserman.

[Speaker 20]: That was two minutes?

[Speaker 11]: Ms. Barton? Denise, are you there?

[Speaker 7]: Can you hear me?

[Speaker 11]: Yes, go ahead. You can begin.

[Speaker 7]: Good evening, this is Denise Barton on item 16A. I'm baffled as to why you think the resident taxpayers should be responsible for any business upgrades on the Promenade, especially when you refuse to provide a safe city to the residents or to anyone, for that matter. Uh, and isn't the water and wastewater upgrade fees for outdoor dining, county fees, which require initial investment of tens of thousands of dollars? And aren't, and isn't, and aren't the Promenade businesses privately owned? Then why should the resident taxpayers be responsible for upgrades or conversions from retail to restaurant for privately owned businesses that this, that this resident... th- that the resident taxpayers will get no direct financial r- recovery from? This item looks like nothing more than further financial mismanagement from the city council members, Zwick and Negrete. Thank you.

[Speaker 19]: Okay, that concludes the comments on these items, and we will now hear the staff report on, uh, item 11A.

[Speaker 11]: Let me read the title first.

[Speaker 19]: Oh, my apologies. Sorry.

[Speaker 11]: So 11A is receive and adopt the Santa Monica Boulevard Safety Study, funded by Caltrans Sustainable Transportation Planning Grant.

[Speaker 17]: Good evening, uh Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem, and members of the City Council. Um, my name is Carlos Hernandez. I'm a senior transportation planner with the Mobility Division, and I'm very excited to be at this point presenting the Santa Monica Boulevard Safety Study for adoption. I'm joined here tonight by our partners in the Public Works Department, as well as Big Blue Bus um, and they've been essential in shaping this plan. We last met in June, where I provided much of the background of this project and some of the work we've done to date. Uh, tonight, I wanna provide more of an update on the work since then, as well as our next steps for getting this project built. Oh, perfect, thank you.... So as we all know, this project is a safety study of the entire two point four-mile stretch of Santa Monica Boulevard within the city limits. Uh, we know Santa Monica Boulevard is a key east-west corridor for our residents and visitors, so balancing the needs of all users is very important for this project. Through this project, we gathered existing conditions and t- a ten-year crash, uh, history, so we can really understand how the corridors function. Um, we did a robust community engagement process, where we've worked with stakeholders in the community. We've done, uh, mailed flyers, we've done pop-up events to really get as much feedback for this project as possible, and ultimately identify targeted safety improvements for just about every intersection on this corridor. So I mentioned we looked at ten years of, uh, crash data as part of our safety analysis, and I just want to give you a very high-level summary of the findings, 'cause I know you've heard some of this information before. Uh, we essentially found that right-of-way violations are the primary cause of crashes, so one party crashing into another party. For crashes just involving vehicles, the most common crash scenario involves broadside crashes. For, uh, in pedestrians, this involves drivers turning left into a pedestrian crossing at an intersection. Through this safety analysis, we found that crashes occur most, most frequently at signalized intersections, but severity is higher at unsignalized intersections, so those locations where you have those stop signs on the side streets. So while the safety analysis provided a historic view of crashes, we wanted to talk to the community, get as much feedback, uh, as possible, and that's been essential for understanding their experiences along Santa Monica Boulevard. So engagement for this project kicked off at the Downtown Library, if you remember. It was a Halloween night, and participants were able to, uh, vote for their priorities and their vision for Santa Monica Boulevard on these really fun interactive beacons. As part of our roadshow as staff, we actually visited uh, Douglas Park, McKinley Elementary School, and the Farmers Market with some project boards, again, to get the word out of the project and meet people where they're at. We've mailed over ten thousand postcards to residents and businesses within a half mile of the corridor. We conducted an in-person safety audit of key intersections and worked with, uh Providence St. John's Health Center. Um we've been working in partnership with McKinley Elementary School and presenting at their, uh, events and talking to the PTA. And we also hosted an online interactive mapping tool, where we got over three hundred and fifty comments very detailed comments, that helped us w- uh, with shaping the design recommendations. Um, I will just mention we've also presented to our neighborhood associations, as well as the City Planning Commission back in May. And the final engagement event, it was a big production that took place at the Santa Monica YMCA where, if you remember, it was an open house-style meeting, and it was Route 66 theme, so it was really fun and had this sort of Googie architecture style to it. We had, uh, sixty-two participants there take-- essentially take a road trip down Santa Monica Boulevard, and they were able to leave us comments on the fifteen intersections we had propped up on displays. So over the sc- over the course of this year-long engagement process, we learned that residents are mostly concerned with two things. One is pedestrian crossing conditions, and two is drivers speeding along the corridor. Of course, w- as I mentioned, we got a lot of detailed informati- information throughout the year, and that really helped us with the designs for each intersection. Of course, we've also paired community concerns with the safety analysis work that I had mentioned, um, as well as our field observations and our understanding of land use patterns, uh, along the project area. So considering this, we've organized improvements into three buckets. The first is corridor-wide improvements focus intersections, and transit improvements, and I'll talk a little bit about them. So we'll start with corridor-wide improvements. I know this graphic is a lot, right? There's a lot of information here. But the main takeaway here is that we are recommending improvements at just about every intersection on Santa Monica Boulevard. These corridor-wide improvements are low to moderate cost, and they're applied consistently throughout the corridor with an emphasis of, uh, addressing crash patterns. The types of improvements you see here include ensuring that pavement markings and signs are consistent, applying the right-turn only restrictions from the side streets at those signalized intersections improving bicycle crossings through the intersections to get bicyclists onto the bike network installing leading pedestrian intervals to give pedestrians a head start at signalized intersections, and signal timing coordinations along all signalized uh, locations. For transit improvements, we're recommending relocating bus stops to the far side of the intersection to improve visibility, but also minimize right-turning conflicts. So places with uh, bus stop relocations include Sixth Street, Eleventh, Fourteenth, and Berkeley Street. And at Berkeley Street, that westbound bus stop has already been moved to the far side in coordination with BBB and that was, um, us just already getting some of this work done in coordination with them. So for locations where we can't move the bus stop to the far side for, let's say, a driveway or another conflict, uh, we propose queue jumps. This essentially gives buses signal priority at the near side stop, um, and lets them cut in front of traffic, as you can see in the graphic. These locations include Lincoln Boulevard and Twenty-Sixth Street, and at these locations, we also propose widening the bus stop or the sidewalk area, um, so we can have increased sidewalk space. The buses will stop in lane, and that can prevent drivers, again, from sort of going around buses and making those right turns, causing some of those visibili- visibility issues.... The third transit improvement is peak hour bus-only lanes specifically from Harvard Street to Centinela Avenue, where the road's wide enough to accommodate all the same travel lanes um, and also new bus-only lanes with minimal impact, so they would operate during the peak hours. As you can see in the diagram, uh, the proposed bus-only lanes are recommended where there's currently a parking lane and only operate in the AM and the PM peak hours. So these are the times, um, bus service experiences delays. This design's similar to what we see out there on Lincoln Boulevard today. So our recommendation for bus-only lanes also support regional efforts that are being led by Caltrans and the Westside Cities Council of Governments. Caltrans is working on a peak hour, a bus-only lane project from Santa Monica Boulevard or on on Santa Monica Boulevard from the 405 Freeway to Centinela Avenue, and in our study, we recommend extending the reach of that bus-only lane. Um, of course, the Westside Cities Council of Governments is leading a separate effort called the Westside Bus Connection Program, that improves, uh, or it aims to improve bus service on three corridors one of which is Santa Monica Boulevard within the city limits. Um, the COG is currently doing community engagement, uh and our team will continue to work with the COG on this separate study. Um, but ultimately, staff is prepared to, uh continue on the design of the Santa Monica Boulevard Safety Study once the engagement process of the COG project is completed, so it could all be coordinated together. So now the third bucket of improvements is, of course, the focus intersection improvements. I'm sure you're all seeing some of these diagrams. Um, so there's fourteen of these locations where we're recommending uh, targeted improvements. They're very um cater or, or tailored to the intersection and some of the crash history we've seen. So I'm gonna walk just through three of them tonight, um, but I'm happy to take uh, questions or discuss any of the other focus intersections as well. The first one is at 6th Street, so this is a downtown location with a lot of pedestrian activities. So here, we are recommending a new pedestrian scramble, uh, paired with a no right turn on red restriction. Again heavy pedestrian activity that we've seen here. Um, we're including curb extensions, as you can see in the number three. So that supports that near side bus stop at the southwest corner, and then a curb extension at the southeast corner as well. Uh, in the outline in number four you could see the bike markings across the intersection. There's a bike lane here so it supports getting the bike lane all the way to the intersection and getting bicyclists through the intersection. And then a bus stop relocation, as you can see, indicated in number five, uh, working again with Big Blue Bus on the rerouting of Route one, so this supports, um, that effort. So Chelsea Avenue is the other, uh, area, uh, focus intersection I wanna talk about, and this receives some of the most comments as a place to improve crossing conditions. Um I mentioned we did a lot of outreach, and a lot of it did focus here on Chelsea. Um as we worked with McKinley Elementary School, we've had pop-up uh, events at their Family Literacy Night and the World-- their World Heritage Day as well. Um, we did our walk audit, and this was one of the locations where our team went out there and observed sort of the behaviors. Um, we've talked a lot, uh with Victor, the crossing guard here at this intersection. He just-- he's seen so much. And of course, we've observed, right? We've, we've seen a lot of people cross the street here out of necessity. Uh, so at this location, we are recommending a new crosswalk with a pedestrian signal. So this crossing would be further reinforced with a median refuge island that allows both pedestrians and bicyclists to sort of get through that median refuge. Um, and it does also limit the turning movements at this intersection, so the eastbound and westbound left turns would be limited, as well as the southbound left turn. Um again, create, uh, creating an environment where there's fewer, uh, turning movements and fewer potential for conflict. Again, our goal here was really to improve crossing conditions and to get bicyclists safely through the intersection and get them on the pr-- bikeway network. We have a project on Broadway, where we wanna get bicyclists, uh, easily through um, onto their bike, the bikeway network. And we've received a lot of positive feedback from the community on this design. I think what I hear a lot from the parents at McKinley is, "I wish it could be done today because my kids are there right now." So the third example I'm gonna show today is at Princeton Street, and we know there's a recent crash here, and we realize that there's already a crosswalk here as well. Um, we do propose improving it with a landscape median refuge to again, shorten those crossing distances and narrow that roadway space to, to make it, uh, feel and, and become a slower street. Uh, we also propose limiting the turning movements here with the landscape median and the right turn only from the side streets. Again, limiting the number of turning movements and potentials for conflict. Now, staff recommends that improvements are organized into two separate phases for implementation. Phase one could be implemented within two and a half to five years and planned with the repaving of Santa Monica Boulevard. So our public works team that we've been working with um, they've prioritized Santa Monica Boulevard as an area to repave, um, and coordinate those efforts so that we can get these phase one improvements on the ground. So in phase one, we would install all the necessary striping and bollards to enforce those right turns from the side streets. We could outline the curb extensions and introduce center line hardening, as you can see in the diagram here.... and that helps reduce those turning speeds for drivers. Uh, we could add bikeway markings through the intersections, again, getting bicyclists onto the bikeway network. We could also uh, include minor traf-- or changes to traffic signals, like implementing leading pedestrian intervals, uh, signal timing coordinations, and in particular coordinating the area between 20th and 26th Street. So that's phase one, and phase two requires more significant, uh, design and civil engineering work since we're impacting curb lines, utilities, catch basins, fire hydrants, those sorts of things. So these projects would be implemented after phase one. So you do phase one get it on the ground, and then you can modify as needed, and that way, phase two has a design that's sound and that we've learned from. Phase two improvements could be implemented within three to ten years and that includes some of our bigger ticket items, like new signals, left turn phasing, concrete curb extensions, uh curb ramps, landscape median islands things like that. Phase two improvements for the entire corridor are estimated to cost around seven point two million dollars. So the scale and the cost of these phase two projects means we'd, uh need to find additional funding from local, uh, s-- or state or federal grants. So if adopted tonight, staff is ready to begin work on phase one for the improvements that include the signing striping of the corridor, and of course re- coordinating that with the repaving of Santa Monica Boulevard. So that effort can begin immediately and can be projected to be completed before the Olympic and Paralympic Games for phase one, as you can see at that top bar.

[Speaker 0]: At the same time, staff, uh, will be applying to the Statewide Active Transportation Program for phase two, and that includes all the concrete work, um at those focus intersections that I had mentioned, uh, with the application being submitted this June. And if awarded, we anticipate going through the process to accept funds and begin on the design for phase two in the summer of next year. And if that timeline holds, construction can begin in the winter of twenty twenty-eight, twenty-nine. Again, I, I'm happy to be here. Um, I just wanna thank our stakeholders who are listening, who have supported us throughout this whole process, our consultant team, our city departments, who have been a part of this project from the beginning. Uh, so with that, I'm happy to take any questions you might have. Thank you.

[Speaker 1]: Thank you. Do folks wanna get in the queue with questions? Okay. Council Member Zot.

[Speaker 2]: Thanks so much for this. Um excited for many of these improvements uh, to become a reality and appreciate all the work that's been done thus far. Can't believe it was twenty twenty-four when we started talking to people about this. Um I have a couple questions. Um excuse me, um, bear with me as I go through this because it was a long report and I'm still digesting it myself. Um first of all, I just wanna say again, I appreciate the work that's been done. I also especially appreciate the treatment on Chelsea. Um, as you highlighted, um I would love for it to happen in the next five years, uh, like the parents who, who said the same. Um, so I'm, I'm concerned that it's, that it's slated to happen not you know, for at least five years. But um beyond that, um, I wanted to just speak to a couple of things and ask questions. The first had to do with speed um, um, on the corridor and efforts to reduce speeds. Um, I know that when we spoke in the summer of last year, we talked about reducing lane widths as one technique for reducing speeds on the corridor, especially, uh, in the sections where I think the eighty-fifth percentile speeds are between thirty-five and forty-nine miles an hour currently on the corridor. Um, can you go into which parts of the, um, plan involve reduced, um, lane widths? Um, because I, I seem to see several that, that seem still quite wide.

[Speaker 0]: Absolutely. So in that eastern segment um, we have noticed that the eighty-fifth percentile of speeds is higher, so we have recorded sort of higher-speeding vehicles on the east. We also know that that's the segment of Santa Monica Boulevard that has the widest profile. So hearing feedback from the, um, study session back in June, we went back to the drawing board and looked at travel lanes, um for those segments where we have the ability to narrow, uh, travel lanes in certain segments, and also at the entrance and the departure of certain intersections, we're able to sort of stripe a fog line to delineate, better delineate and create just a narrow, uh, a narrow- narrower lane as drivers are traveling through the corridor. So that is one of the speed reduction strategies that we are implementing on the corridor, in particular in that eastern segment.

[Speaker 2]: Okay, um, I wanna just speak to a couple of sections that were pointed out to me where I guess from, from Twentieth to Chelsea um, and from Chelsea to Twenty-sixth. I, I think I'm-- if I'm not mistaken, I'm seeing lane widths that are still, like twelve and a half feet wide. Is that correct?

[Speaker 0]: Um, I'd have to pull up the AutoCAD, uh, of, of the existing lane widths there, um-

[Speaker 2]: I see five travel lanes of sixty-three fit- feet in width and no other, you know improvements on that section. So I guess just sixty-three divided by five gets me to twelve point six as an average lane width. Does that sound correct?

[Speaker 0]: Yeah, and, and not all lane widths are sort of even, like, the, the number one lane is usually narrower, the number two lane is wider because it carries, um, transit buses who require a wider lane width, and then the parking lanes, whether they're there or not, they- those will also differ.

[Speaker 2]: Okay. But definitely more than, say, a ten-foot lane, for instance, it would seem. Okay, um and then, uh I guess I wanted to s- talk about the, the second thing related to, uh, uh, the far siding of bus stops. That seems like a great practice, but I guess I didn't see it, um, implemented in all of the, the the, the treatment or all of the potential stops. Um, uh, I'm thinking specifically uh, one example being the, uh uh, Twenty-sixth and Santa Monica intersection, I believe. I'm just curious as to why we didn't far side the bus stops in that intersection, for instance.

[Speaker 0]: Yeah, that's a great question. Uh, so at that, uh, intersection, the street, um east of Twenty-sixth sort of widens up and currently, there is a near side bus stop in the westbound direction, um, and then the near side bus stop is in the, um eastbound direction on the southwest corner. Um, so at that location, we propose, uh, for the southwest corner to have an expanded sidewalk area. As I had mentioned, there's certain areas where um, the sidewalk space is, um, sort of at its minimum, and there are things like trees-... furniture, the bus stop itself. Um, so this was an opportunity to both expand the sidewalk and offer just a better, better pedestrian environment, um and also allow for in-lane stops. Now, at the southwest corner in the southbound direction, there's also bus stop number forty-three. So for anyone making connections there, it makes it more convenient for, for, uh, bus patrons to just use or to stay sort of in that corner and be able to transfer. Um so those are two main reasons why we proposed leaving that one nearside. Um, and then at the far side location, where Allen Jeffries Framing is currently there is on-street parking, so moving it far side would, uh, potentially impact some of the parking, uh, there. Um and instead, we propose a curb extension at that southeast corner, um, which again shortens crossing distances, supports pedestrians, uh, but it can also, um eliminate that northbound right turn lane which then we can introduce a couple of more on-street parking spaces to support either parking, loading, other things that are sort of, uh, needed along the corridor.

[Speaker 2]: Got it. So, um, theoretically, you could do the bulb out on both sides, I imagine. Um, and theoretic- and and seemingly, uh, we've added parking spaces at the same place that we're worried about taking them away?

[Speaker 0]: So theoretically, yeah, we can, um move the stop far side. Yeah, and that was, um, staff's determination was to amplify the sidewalk space at the near side location.

[Speaker 2]: Right, but we could do both, right?

[Speaker 0]: Yeah, I believe so. If there aren't any driveway conflicts in the area, I believe we can. I'd have to look at the concept plans.

[Speaker 2]: Yeah, I mean, you said we were losing two parking spaces, but we're also gaining two parking spaces, it sounds like, on that same corner. Is that correct?

[Speaker 0]: Yeah.

[Speaker 2]: Okay. Um, and I, I, I assume the reason why we generally are trying to far side these bus stops is for the efficiency of the buses, correct? So that they can not stop at an intersection, face a light, and then have to wait again, you know, to go right?

[Speaker 0]: That, and, um, you know, not have cars drive around and squeeze-

[Speaker 2]: Right

[Speaker 0]: ... through and turn in front of them.

[Speaker 2]: Okay, thank you. Um with the, uh area, uh, uh, closer to downtown, I noted in the study that there's some-- some of the slowest bus speeds on the whole route are, are, are between, I think, Fourth and, and Lincoln. I think it said something between four and seven miles an hour at peak. Does that sound correct?

[Speaker 0]: Yeah.

[Speaker 2]: Was there any consideration of expanding the, uh, bus lane that currently exists, I think, uh, going westbound, sorry eastbound, uh, currently stopping at Fourth Street and extending that to Lincoln Boulevard?

[Speaker 0]: Can you repeat the question just so I can visually-

[Speaker 2]: Yeah.

[Speaker 0]: -see it too.

[Speaker 2]: Um, so west, uh, eastbound traffic, uh bus speeds are indicated to be between seven and four miles an hour at peak. Um there's a bus-only lane that exists, but it stops at Fourth Street. Um, was there any consideration of continuing that bus-only lane to Lincoln due to the fact that this is the one of the slowest bus speed areas on the whole corridor?

[Speaker 0]: Yeah, that's a great, uh, question. We didn't, um, consider that particular design. Um, the eastbound, um, curbside lane from Ocean to Fourth is sort of, um, a transit plaza project that we know that it's been around for quite some time. Um, extending that um, could be a consideration. I think the only trade-off there would be on-street parking for the segments, um, would be east of, uh, Fourth Street.

[Speaker 2]: Yeah. Okay. Um lastly, I'm just curious, you know, again because these eighty-fifth percentile speeds are very concerning to me. Um, were there any treatments that were considered? I know there were some lane narrowing, though there's other sections that I feel like they're still too wide. But were there any other treatments that were considered to reduce speeds, where currently they're, you know, in excess obviously, of our speed limit, let alone at a safe speed, where someone were to collide, you know, with a bike or, or pedestrian? Are there any other treatments to reduce speed on that section?

[Speaker 0]: Absolutely. Um, at many of these locations, we've, uh proposed median refuge islands, um, quite long and landscaped median refuge islands to narrow sort of the, the, the visual field um, and create just a narrow profile profile street. So instead of seeing a street that's, you know, seventy-eight feet wide, it'd be sort of half of that as somebody's driving down the intersection. So the median refuge islands, that's that's one. Uh, curb extensions, um, that helps slow down right-turning drivers in particular, and also creates a narrower field of view at intersections. Uh, so those are some of the things that we've done to slow down speeds, and we've been working with our, um, traffic team as well to do signal timing coordination, which is another element of this project, which can be timed in such a way to discourage speeding.

[Speaker 2]: Okay, last question: Are we at all concerned about the new, um, unsignali- uh, crossings that we're adding at unsignalized intersections? I mean, I know that's a treatment that we did, uh, at Wilshire, where it seems like a similar treatment here, where we are, as you said adding some um, um, refuge islands and some, um, flashing, uh, I can't remember RF-

[Speaker 0]: ... RRFBs-

[Speaker 2]: RRFBs.

[Speaker 0]: Yes, flashing beacons.

[Speaker 2]: But we know that, that, you know, there have been pedestrian injuries and fatalities on Wilshire, you know, uh since we did that exact treatment. I mean are we concerned about adding new crossings, uh, at unsignalized intersections with just that same treatment?

[Speaker 0]: Well, as, as I mentioned, one of the main sort of, um, desires from the community were improved crossing conditions. Um what we've seen out there today, in particular at Chelsea, uh, Avenue, is, you know, people are crossing the street where- wherever they need to. Um, and using federal highway guidance for um, improving crossings at uncontrolled locations, these are the treatments that we are putting forward today, which fall in line with the guidance there, and support new pedestrian crossings.

[Speaker 2]: Chelsea is signalized, though, correct? That's the proposal.

[Speaker 0]: Chelsea is a pedestrian signal, correct.

[Speaker 2]: Signal, okay. Um, that's all for now. Thank you.

[Speaker 0]: Thank you.

[Speaker 1]: Great, so we have Council Member Zernatskaya. Snell, are you out now? Okay.

[Speaker 3]: No.

[Speaker 4]: I-

[Speaker 3]: Oh, I, I actually hit the wrong button.

[Speaker 1]: That's fine. Zernatskaya, then Snell, then Hall.

[Speaker 4]: Um, thank you. Just echoing the thanks for all this work. I went to the September open house with my dog, and we had a lot of fun walking through all of the different little, uh, areas. And I apologize if anything that I'm asking has already been stated, I might have just missed it. So, um, starting with regarding the peak hour, uh, bus rapid transit lanes, could you confirm where we're contemplating putting those in? And, um understanding that the Westside Cities COG is currently studying a bus rapid transit lanes, uh, along Santa Monica Boulevard how easy or difficult would it be for us to potentially make changes to ours in the future, based on the results of that study?

[Speaker 0]: So to answer your first question, we're looking at implementing peak hour bus-only lanes from Princeton Street, uh, east towards the, uh, city limit, um Sentinel Avenue, which would then link with the Caltrans project for bus-only lanes, so it'd be continuous throughout there. Um, and the second question is, how easy would it be to coordinate designs with the Westside Cities COG study? And our staff is, um, you know, involved in that project, and I think that the timing of this, um... On one hand, we have the opportunity to sort of work on um a timeline that's coordinated with public works for the repaving of it. At the same time, we wanna make sure that it is, um that it works with the Westside Cities COG study. Um, I think previously I'd been asked if any of these improvements sort of conflict with the potential for, uh bus-only lanes west of Princeton, and the answer is no because we still have to go in and sort of design, um, what the bus-only lane looks like, how it functions and how it can be modified. Of course with repaving, you don't want to, you know, stripe everything, re- repave stripe, and then have a study come in much later and then say, "Actually, we're gonna re-stripe or redo some of the things." So we want those efforts to be coordinated.

[Speaker 4]: And do you happen to know how many, um how many bus, uh, like, how many routes currently use Santa Monica Boulevard, including both Big Blue Bus Metro, and any others?

[Speaker 0]: Yeah. R- uh, for the majority extent it's, uh, Big Blue Bus Route 1 and, uh, Rapid 10, which I believe is still, um, uh, in operation there, and then, uh, Metro Local Route 4. And then when you get towards the sort of transit plaza area, that's where every bus seems to stop there, making transfers and things like that, but it's usually just circulates there. But the extent of Santa Monica Boulevard, it's three lines.

[Speaker 4]: Okay. And could you please remind me where that plaza area is again?

[Speaker 0]: It's from Ocean Avenue to 4th Street.

[Speaker 4]: Okay. And what improvements are we thinking there to make it easier for all of the buses that stop there?

[Speaker 0]: That's a great question. We've actually uh... We've been working with Big Blue Bus to reroute, um, Route 1 in particular. Um, so part of our improvements at the intersection for 6th Street, does have a bus that's a bus stop that's relocated, so that it can better sort of loop through that area. Um that's as far as we've gone in terms of improving through this plan. Obviously any other improvements down the line, this plan wouldn't preclude, you know rerouting bus stops or anything like that and the transit plaza would still be in place.

[Speaker 4]: Okay. Thank you. And, and for the bus stops, including the ones we're relocating and the ones that are, uh, planned to remain in the same locations, are we also looking at physical improvements for the bus stops themselves, so folks waiting for the bus are protected from the elements and all of those other wonderful things?

[Speaker 0]: Yeah. No, that's an excellent point, and I think that's something we just have to keep coordinating with, uh, Big Blue Bus. I did note that at Berkeley, um, the w- east, sorry, the westbound bus stop was relocated, and that was partially, um, due to wanting to install a, a new shelter, a new bus stop furniture there. And they, you know, contacted us and said, "What's your plan for Berkeley?" We said "Relocate the bus stop," and it was done. So those efforts are coordinated, um, to the extent that we can, you know, move bus stop or furniture in those shelters things like that. I think that's to, to be determined with BBB.

[Speaker 4]: Got it. And that... And to make sure I'm understanding correctly, that does also include improving the, the furniture and the physical aspects of it, to have actual covers and, and everything like that?

[Speaker 0]: To, to the extent it's feasible working with Big Blue Bus, and the, the furniture available, and those types, sorts of things, yeah.

[Speaker 4]: ... and then, um, I, I believe we've discussed it up here before, but could you please confirm if we're also planning on eliminating, uh, quote, unquote, "beg buttons" for pedestrian crossings and for bikeway crossings, and instituting some sort of, uh, more automatic or motion sensor, whatever technology there is, to make it easier for pedestrians to cross without having to press a button?

[Speaker 0]: Yeah. Yeah, and I think the, um, the, the science behind, uh, you know, signal timing is, is something I'm just still learning more and more about every day. And, and really, the focus of this project and some of the recommendations we have in here are to, to improve, um, audible signals for sight-impaired pedestrians. So we do recommend, uh, audible pedestrian signals which means, um, you know, a, a, a vision-impaired person can press a button and then they- it'll indicate sort of where the location, whether they have a wait or a walk signal, and then the t- the countdown. Uh, so those are things that we are recommending. Now, some of these locations would be on recall, where you don't have to press the button. Um, but we are recommending the audible portion of it through this plan because that's something that, again, supports pedestrian crossings.

[Speaker 4]: So would it be that the, that they're automatic, but there is a button just so that there's a speaker for better ADA access?

[Speaker 0]: Correct. That, that's how I understand it is there... For the most- at most- of many locations, they kinda be automatic where you don't have to press the button but the button is there for an audible component. And there may be times of day where the pedestrian signal is timed where you may have to press the button and that is based on, again, some of the traffic engineering and the signal lengths.

[Speaker 4]: Is there a way that they, that during those times, they wouldn't actually physically have to press a button, and there would be some sort of, um, detector or sensor that would know there's somebody waiting to cross?

[Speaker 5]: Uh, hi, uh, Kyle Kozar, Principal Transportation Planner. Thank you, all Council. Um, yeah, so, uh, we would, but like, those recall periods would be during, like, coordinated periods of... So, um, on some signals, where it's a lot of pedestrian traffic, downtown and things like that, then yeah, it could al- be always on recall. And there's some other places where, you know, if you're only getting kind of maybe one or two or three pedestrians an hour or something, then you know, on off-peak times when there's not a lot of volume, they could be in recall when it's coordinated with that. And then, like, in off-peak times, like late at night or something, they might not be because, um because, you know, there's questions about, you know, vehicles might get frustrated. They're sitting there, then they start running red lights if they're waiting and there's nobody there. And so you know, there is a, a science to finding, using data, kinda where it makes sense and what times of day you wanna do that, so that it doesn't leave to other unintended consequences.

[Speaker 4]: But there's nothing that would just have a sensor so that somebody doesn't have to physically-

[Speaker 5]: Oh-

[Speaker 4]: ... touch a button, or there is?

[Speaker 5]: Yeah, yeah, yeah.

[Speaker 4]: Okay.

[Speaker 5]: Yeah, exactly.

[Speaker 4]: And that's-

[Speaker 5]: Yeah, that's what the recall would be. So it would automatically, um... You know you wouldn't have to-- It would sense you and could do that.

[Speaker 4]: Okay. It-

[Speaker 5]: But it would, it would not always be automatic at every location, if that makes sense.

[Speaker 4]: Why?

[Speaker 5]: Because, so like, for instance, if you were at an intersection where, you know, the data shows that pedestrian activity is way lower, say, late at night, uh, and then every tra- time the traffic signal went it went into, um, a, like, some pedestrian phase or something when it's not called then, uh then, you know, drivers can sit there there's nobody there. They might be waiting unnecessarily, and then it leads to-- it can lead to, like, other frustrations and things like that. So we can coordinate that, that, uh functionality you want, using data with the right times of day when it can be implemented, if that makes sense.

[Speaker 4]: It's-

[Speaker 5]: When it's most advantageous.

[Speaker 4]: Okay, thank you. And, and that's something that we have just ongoing control over so that's something we could change when-

[Speaker 5]: We're working on it. So we've been upgrading all of the traffic signals to new technology and new software. Our traffic engineer's not here, so I can't say exactly where we are, but they've been making incredible progress. And as we do that, then the functionality to be able to do those things and coordinate them is gonna be able to do it, yeah.

[Speaker 4]: That sounds very exciting. Thank you. Um and then, so I, I wanted to get some clarification for the, uh, currently unsignalized intersections and the intersections where we're putting in unsignalized intersections or planning to: Um are there also going to be lights on the actual street in the crosswalks that we're putting or just on the sides?

[Speaker 0]: Um, are you referring to, like, the embedded-on-the-ground-

[Speaker 4]: Yes

[Speaker 0]: ... sort of-

[Speaker 4]: Yeah

[Speaker 0]: ... flashing beacons? Um, I, I believe we've tested or done those at a couple of intersections with not much success, um, in terms of maintenance and-

[Speaker 3]: We phased them out.

[Speaker 0]: We phased them out, essentially, um, and instead favour sort of the flashing beacons above. Um, we have looked at vendors that, um, have equipment where the flashing beacons can be located on mast arms. So basically, instead of just at the corner where the sidewalk is, uh, a larger mast arm, where it can be in lane so that drivers are seeing the flashing beacon right in front of them. Um, there's numerous examples, um in, in throughout our, I think, our neighbouring city-

[Speaker 4]: Mm-hmm

[Speaker 0]: ... Los Angeles. Like in the Venice neighbourhood, there's a couple out there I took photos of. So that is some of the equipment that we're looking at, uh primarily because we phased out the sort of in-the-ground flashers.

[Speaker 4]: Did we phase those out because they were just too expensive to maintain and weren't-

[Speaker 0]: Yeah

[Speaker 4]: ... effective or?

[Speaker 0]: ... Yeah, they, they, they break very easily with the nature of where they are. They're very costly and expensive to maintain, and it's, like, a ton of work. And so, uh, we had two actually on Santa Monica Boulevard, I believe it was at like, 15th or 16th or something like that and maybe 18th, and, you know, it was just in a constant state of disrepair. And so it's just been a very challenging thing to implement more of those. And then every time you repave, too, then it's a whole other thing and a whole other level of maintenance and challenge with reinstalling.

[Speaker 4]: So it sounds like, it sounds like the cost-benefit analysis just isn't there. Okay, thank you for that clarification.

[Speaker 0]: Yeah.

[Speaker 4]: And, um, one last question. So I understand the prioritization of phase one to phase two to implement these quick-build improvements using paint bollards, and the like. Would you be able to clarify how we could u- utilize paint and how we're planning to, to create visual cues for drivers to encourage them to drive at safer speeds?

[Speaker 0]: Yeah, um, so the str- the striping that's uh, shown in some of these, uh, sort of diagrammatic intersections, um, in particular at, um, at the corners of intersections where there's sort of like you know, no space because it's a red curb or something like that, uh, these are areas that we, uh, find opportunities to improve, like the daylighting, uh, using paint and bollards in some instances. I think there's some good examples out in Pico, uh, Boulevard of a recent project we did there, where, um, there's just a lot of opportunities to use paint and bollards and signs to, again, implement those measures to narrow the field, create more organization on the street, and delineate travel lanes.

[Speaker 4]: And do we also utilize things like optical illusions to try to, you know, to make a driver think, "Oh, there is a bump there," but there actually isn't a bump, it just looks like that because of the paint, and they slow down?

[Speaker 0]: That's a good question, and, and I think the only one I'm familiar with are, are are mainly diagonal lines that sort of veer drivers away from sidewalks or cur-- corners or things like that, um, as well as, uh, re- reflective pavement markers. Again, if you drive on, on Pico Boulevard tonight, you'll see a lot of that, um-

[Speaker 4]: Yeah

[Speaker 0]: ... a lot of reflectors. So the street's lit up, right? And it's fairly lower maintenance, um, as opposed to, like, you know, lights throughout the medians and things like that. So those are some of the things that we can definitely implement as part of this project.

[Speaker 4]: Okay, great. Thank you very much.

[Speaker 6]: Thank you.

[Speaker 4]: Yeah.

[Speaker 6]: I, I just have two quick questions. The first one you said is that phase two you've, uh, applied for an application looking for funding to im- implement phase two of the project. Is that what my understanding is?

[Speaker 0]: That, that is our plan, uh, is to then apply for, uh, grant funding for phase two. So that would be sort of part of our next steps, if adopted.

[Speaker 6]: Next steps. So you haven't applied as of yet?

[Speaker 0]: We have not, because we, we need to adopt the plan to be able to then apply for funding to build the elements in the, in the project.

[Speaker 6]: The reason I ask is because, uh, we, we got a lot of comments from the community regarding the, the, the Santa Monica Chelsea area with respect to that lighting there, the light there, which I think is a cr- you know, excellent idea. And I was just wondering, uh, in your implementation, is there a way that we could, uh, speed up that particular project? Because I think that is a, a strong safety measure. Is-- has there been any discussion about it?

[Speaker 0]: Yeah, there, there has been internal discussion about it. I think ultimately that's an intersection that, um, you know you, you can't sort of stripe a signal right? You can't do, like, a, a quick treatment of, um, of a new pedestrian signal, and I think that implementing a new signal with new curb ramps, with the new crosswalk is sort of all in one package and it gets quite expensive. So that's why we look for outside funding to leverage grants to be able to do that and implement that all. It's sort of labeled a phase two. It's not to say that it's not important, but just phase two is sort of our approach for going out and chasing money, getting money to then build sort of our, our more civil and engineering-heavy projects like that one.

[Speaker 6]: I'd be interested in keeping abreast of what, what that project goes along, 'cause that's something... And then my last question, we heard from a we heard from a public today regarding um, the commercial businesses and how we um introduce them to the new lanes going left onl- and going right only and these kind of things. And what have we done with respect to our businesses along Santa Monica to get them, uh, aware of what's going on and how they will, um interact with their customers going in and out of their businesses?

[Speaker 0]: Yeah. So from the start of this project we've, um, sort of set up our centralized you know, project webpage where we have all of our information. But we really tried to reach out to businesses by both sending out, you know, the ten thousand postcards that I had mentioned, uh, at the beginning of the project. Um, we've done door knocking, um, on the corridor, and we've-- I'd say we've talked to six seventy, eighty percent of the businesses there that were willing to engage with us and we've left posters in certain businesses and cafes. So we certainly, you know, want to talk to as many businesses and people as possible that would be, um in- interested in the project and see how we can work together. Uh, those are some of the things we did, um, proactively so that we can get the word out about the project. Um, as you know, we had that Route 66 meeting that was, you know publicized, social media again, our website, we have a newsletter um, that, that goes out to our membership base as well. So w- we do our best to get the word out, at least for sort of where the project is at and what phases it's in. Um, same for the intersection design. So we had, you know, this intersection design at the meeting on September. Uh, we posted that-... immediately after that meeting to our website, so we had that living, uh, on our web's project webpage and then, you know, in preparation for this, uh, item tonight, um, have sort of publicized as much as we can the designs of, of all the intersections.

[Speaker 3]: Thank you.

[Speaker 1]: Councilor Rahall.

[Speaker 3]: Uh, thanks, staff, for bringing this study to us. Um, several questions here, and forgive me if I missed this in the thousand-page report we had four days to look through. But did we look at reducing speed limits along any portion of Santa Monica Boulevard as part of the study?

[Speaker 0]: I believe the city, uh, recently conducted survey, um, maybe about two years ago. Uh the blog post that Mia put together, um, on the city website, but streets where there were five mile per hour reductions. Uh, I- per hour on the western end and, um, um, am I remembering that correctly?

[Speaker 3]: I, I think so, but there-

[Speaker 0]: The, the team is verifying it. So this the speed survey is the method by which we look at streets citywide and assess, you know, based off, based off eighty-fifth percentile, and then based off engineering judgment, how we can sort of leave s- posted speed limits where they're at or if we decrease them by five miles per hour. Um, so we'll verify right now uh, if that was the case.

[Speaker 3]: I'm seeing heads being shook in a negative.

[Speaker 1]: There are people with the speed.

[Speaker 3]: Okay, I'll assume no until I'm told otherwise. Um, the report states on page twenty-nine that, quote... Oh, sorry, go ahead.

[Speaker 7]: Sorry, Councilor. I can just clarify that. We did confirm. So in the, as a... Sorry Anuj Gupta, Director of the Department of Transportation. Great to see you all, and thank you for the support of this study. Um, we did look at every street in the city through the speed study a couple of years ago that Carlos referenced. Santa Monica Boulevard, based on the data in the speed study, um, was not one of the ones that was identified in the many, many miles of, uh, streets across the city for speed limit reductions. So a speed limit reduction has not been implemented as a result of that speed study, and a subsequent speed study would need to be conducted, um, in order to, to effectuate speed limit reductions. But it could be something, you know, that we take a look at going forward.

[Speaker 3]: Okay, thank you. So the report states on page twenty-nine that, quote, "Vehicular operations should be considered alongside crash data," end quote. Can you tell me where level of service falls in our priorities, uh, on the, on this project?

[Speaker 0]: Yeah, absolutely. And, um, I think, you know, sa- safety is really the primary goal here, um, for this project. Um, at the same time, I had mentioned balancing the needs of all users for this, um multi-lane arterial that carries up to twenty-seven, twenty-eight thousand vehicles per day, buses, et cetera. So we use level of service as one of the sort of tools to understand how vehicle throughput, uh, interacts throughout the corridor, and we're able to also use, you know, computer simulations to see when we have the proposed improvements at every intersection, what has that done to the corridor in terms of level of service degradation or improvement, et cetera. So that's how we've used level of service in this project.

[Speaker 3]: And were there any treatments rejected because of level of service, uh, and throughput decrease?

[Speaker 0]: Yeah, so the... Initially, we had considered, um, a scramble intersection at 20th Street, um after visiting it during the, uh, one of the walk audits that we did. And at that location, we thought, well, there's, there may be sort of the land use that supports a lot of crossing movements. You have medical centers, hotels, cafes, et cetera. Um, so this could be something we can look into, right? And I think that after looking into it and seeing sort of the, the trade-offs, which would be the sort of vehicle throughput impact um, which would also affect bus operations in that segment from 20th to Cloverfield that's sort of the most congested part of the corridor, um, with the goal of sort of separating pedestrians crossing the street versus vehicles turning. Uh, our team ultimately did- recommends that left turn, um, signals at that... Or sorry uh, um, left- protected left turns at that intersection can sort of achieve that same result which is separate pedestrians crossing versus vehicles driving through, um, and does not have the same impact on the vehicle throughput as a full scramble intersection would. So that was one instance where we had initially looked at it and said, "Let's go sort of run it through the simulation and see what degradation looks like, again, for both vehicles and for transit," and ultimately are recommending, uh, left turn signal phasing at that intersection to separate those vehicle-pedestrian conflicts, which was the main goal.

[Speaker 3]: Doesn't 20th Street already have left turn signal phasing?

[Speaker 0]: Not in all directions.

[Speaker 3]: Okay. What's the difference between left turn signal phasing and having protected left turn lanes? 'Cause 20th Street has left turn lanes in all directions.

[Speaker 0]: Yeah. So it has, it has left turn lanes in all directions, but not protected left turn signals, so that left g- green arrow essentially. So, um, it allows for vehicles to better time sort of oncoming traffic. When you have a permissive, um signal phase or just the green ball you're sort of-... looking at oncoming traffic, but you're also checking over your shoulder to see if people are crossing, so this eliminates that.

[Speaker 3]: Okay. Um, with the proposed queue jump on at 26th Street will there ever be a time when a vehicle will have to take a right turn around the bus from that middle lane, or what is effectively the middle lane, or does the light turn red every time the bus stops there?

[Speaker 0]: That's a great question. I think the design is intended for vehicles to wait behind the bus and not turn right in front of them on the number one lane, which would be the middle lane, to, to your point. Um, in terms of signalization and, and how we m-- Yeah, that, that's a good question.

[Speaker 5]: That's a good question. We'd have to talk to-

[Speaker 0]: We'd have to talk to our, um traffic, uh person to see.

[Speaker 3]: Okay. I, I, I would assume that we're probably not timing a red light to the bus stopping at the bus stop, which means that we would effectively create a situation where a vehicle could be in that middle lane, I think you called it the number one lane, right? Where they would be turning right in front of the bus and thus have a reduced sight line to any pedestrians that are crossing, uh, at 26th Street, correct?

[Speaker 0]: Yeah, so any right-turning vehicles would turn right from the number two lane, so the lane closer to the curb.

[Speaker 3]: If they're following the law. But we know for a fact that that's not what happens at the intersection, right? I'll tell you, I've seen it many times. Okay. Um okay, the, the bus-only lanes and the partial bus lanes... A- and sorry, I know you've been asked this two times now, but I still don't know if I fully understand so maybe let me try back briefing here. Like, we are not including bus-only lanes west of Princeton because the Westside COG is conducting their own study to include full bus lanes at that point?

[Speaker 0]: Um, the, the recommendation that we have set forward is to include the bus-only lane east of Princeton, because the impacts are minimal as far as this safety study sort of has carried this project along the way and knowing that we have the Westside COG study, uh, moving forward to look at sort of more in-depth, uh, transit analysis uh, more so than this project could have taken on because it was primarily a safety focus. But Kyle, do you want to add some?

[Speaker 5]: Yeah, so, um, the Westside COG study, like Carlos said, so the trade-offs to fit a bus lane going west of there, um, are much more significant. And so, you know, they would need to be weighed in on by you all, in that it would require removing a tran- a travel lane in each direction on Santa Monica Boulevard. So at any point, kind of, you know, I think somebody had mentioned, um, uh, by the Transit Mall or just going east- eastbound behi- uh, from the Transit Mall, so from, uh, 5th Street to Lincoln or 7th or, or whatever it was um, you know, so that, in that stretch as well, one of the two travel lanes would have to be removed and be re- re-replaced by a, a transit lane. Um, and so in this study, focusing on, you know, primarily safety improvements and knowing that, uh the Westside COG is gonna be studying and doing a feasibility analysis of all of that, um uh, you know, so we, we kind of- we knew where it fit, where those trade-offs, you know, and, and they, they were gonna give us analysis of what those trade-offs were. And then, to make those decisions, you know, you all, as a deliberative body would have to, you know, decide for a major corridor, you know, this- the, these are the trade-offs and that's what we wanna go with. And so we've been waiting for the Westside COG, Westside COG study uh, to get their analysis of that, so that, you know, that decision can be made in a more deliberative way.

[Speaker 3]: Okay. And do we know when that study will be coming back to us?

[Speaker 5]: Um-

[Speaker 0]: Later.

[Speaker 5]: Uh, no. So I, I think, um we're waiting now to figure out when exactly we're gonna get the initial ten percent design. So they're doing a process by which they will be developing, or they're in the process of developing like, ten percent designs and the initial feasibility analysis, and kind of their recommendations, their consultant team recommendations. Um, and I think at that point would be a good time to, uh, you know, have you all look at that. Um, um and so the, the path at which that happens, I'm, you know, uh, we don't have that. So, you know, whether it's like you direct us to come back, or if we need to schedule a study session or whatever it might be, um, to present that information I think that the consultant team that's doing that also would c- could come and present their findings and whatever their initial recommendations are. Um, and then the decision would have to be made by you all on those kind of big trade-offs for this street.

[Speaker 3]: Got it. Thank you. Um-

[Speaker 5]: But, but... And the last thing I would say is, you know, our inter- and so that they are producing those kind of ten percent concept designs, that we can check in with them after this. On like, you know, at what point would that be ready for that? Um and then could communicate that back to you all on, on how that works. Um, there is a timing question because... And so you know, we'd probably wanna have that happen as soon as we can, because if you saw the, um-

[Speaker 3]: Yeah.

[Speaker 5]: You know, our intent is to move quickly with the plan, um, and implementing it assuming, you know, I don't wanna be too presumptuous. Assuming that we have an adopted plan and are given direction to move forward, you know, um, Public Works is, uh queuing up Santa Monica Boulevard for re-striping in 2027. That means we need to start working on implementing design, um and that means we would wanna get all those sorts of details weighed out on what we are designing. Um-... that would be like, the most efficient way to do that and meet those deadlines or laid out here. Um, and then it wouldn't preclude us from beginning our grant applications, uh that would start and be, uh submitted in June.

[Speaker 3]: Okay. On the pedestrian push buttons um, Council Member Zern Sky had some really great questions there. Um, but I didn't hear you answer why wouldn't we just have the pedestrian recall with audible noises automatically?

[Speaker 5]: Oh, yeah, that, that part would be. Sorry.

[Speaker 3]: So what's the point of the pedestrian b- push buttons then?

[Speaker 5]: So I'm, I'm, I'm not an expert in this, so I'll just do the best that I can, and well, maybe I shouldn't. I don't even know. Um, in talking with, uh, our traffic engineering team, it's that, um... I, um maybe I'm confused about the question honestly.

[Speaker 3]: So in the, in the study, in the staff report, it says that some pedestrian- some intersections will have pedestrian push buttons, beg buttons, uh, to initiate an audible noise. But, um, we heard earlier that, uh, there will be pedestrian recall on a lot of intersections, and so the point of having the, the beg buttons, the pedestrian push buttons, was so that an audible noise would be available.

[Speaker 5]: So, yeah. So, um so I think the... A- and again, I, I think it's more about, like, we're having technology now that we'll be able to implement a more nuanced approach to this and so but I think, like, scenarios that could arise is that, um, if somebody, uh like, let's say it's late at night at, uh Berkeley or something and if it's coordinated to always do that automatically, regardless of time and traffic, let's say somebody walks by it but isn't intending to cross, and they trigger the sensor, and they switch the light. And then a tra- uh-

[Speaker 0]: somebody waiting in their car gets the light. And so there is, th- there can be this pattern where people that, again, we know that people break the law, so people s- can start to get frustrated, or they just run a red light if they're in their car, and they say, "Well I don't see anybody. Like, why is this light always triggered?" So I think that the consideration is, is that there are scenarios, and there are certain times of day at certain locations where maybe we can use the technology to make it work in a more nuanced way, um, instead of just you know, blanketing it, that it's always working this one way all the time. I think we can be nuanced about how we implement it, so that it's most effective at the right times for the most amount of people.

[Speaker 1]: Okay. Not sure I agree with that-

[Speaker 0]: Not sure if that answers your question.

[Speaker 1]: But I'll, I'll buy that for a dollar. Um you mentioned... T-t-t-t- tch. Yeah, uh, so again, sorry, on the push buttons, you mentioned that part of what we're using here is data around which intersections have the most pedestrian crossings and at certain times, right? Um did we control for anything around, maybe people aren't using these intersections because they're not safe?

[Speaker 0]: No, and, and, and we haven't done that analysis and assigned those locations. I mean, I think as we roll that out, that's the sort of thing we would uh, look at, you know, volumes of pedestrians and things like that.

[Speaker 1]: Okay. Are there any specific treatments that can be installed within the next six to twelve months?

[Speaker 0]: Um-

[Speaker 2]: Signals.

[Speaker 0]: Yeah, like, you know, signal stuff. Um I'm trying to remember.

[Speaker 2]: Leading pedestrian intervals.

[Speaker 0]: Leading pedestrian in-intervals. Some of the bus stops that are far-sided, I think you know, working with BBB, we already moved one of them at, at Berkeley. So those sorts of things, I think, could be done very quickly with little effort in terms of, like, designing and... But, you know, re-striping and creating a, a striping signing plan, uh, with, you know even vertical elements, paint and post uh, curb extensions, and thing- things like that, uh, you know, all that has to be designed. That can be on a much faster track because we can use, um, contracted support staff that we have on call, uh, to do that, and, you know, this timeline kind of emphasizes that. You know, our intent, if, if this is adopted, is to move as quickly as we can to try to get the phase one done before the Olympics, and ideally, um, a phase two funded and half designed, and so started after the Olympics, right? So that would be our, our goal in terms of timeline for implementation. Um, and the only-- and but, you know, obviously, factors can slow that down. So...

[Speaker 1]: Okay. Were any raised treatments explored specifically at Chelsea?

[Speaker 2]: Can you elaborate, raised treatments?

[Speaker 1]: Like a raised, like a raised crosswalk.

[Speaker 2]: A raised crosswalk. Um, they were not explored, um, primarily because of it being a multi-lane arterial. Um it's not a treatment that we've done here in Santa Monica, nor one that I've seen on a multi-lane arterial that carries, you know, buses, um, first responders, and things that would have sort of vertical deflection. So it wasn't uh, considered for the Chelsea intersection. Instead, we opted for the refuge island.

[Speaker 1]: Okay. Uh, last question: so we have a new city policy regarding, like unidirectional or perpendicular curb cuts. Um, I saw some of the designs. I think the Sixth Street intersection on the Tar and Roses corner had that diagonal ramp. I assume that's just a uh an outdated design that if it's technically feasible, we will do, um, city policy.

[Speaker 2]: Yeah. So at all the locations, we wanna ensure that curb ramps are aligned with the crosswalk. Um, at the Sixth Street location, for example, if we're proposing a new scramble crosswalk, a lot of those ramps in, um, in some cases, those ramps, um are sort of at the corner, and they have sort of a wider radius or radii that would allow for diagonal crossing as well as-

[Speaker 1]: Yeah, but Fourth Street.

[Speaker 2]: Correct. So at some locations, we may not want to necessarily direct traffic or pedestrian traffic in one direction, if that makes sense.

[Speaker 1]: Yeah, that makes sense. Okay, thank you.

[Speaker 3]: Council Member Raskin, then we have one question from Council Member Zelic.

[Speaker 4]: Thanks, and I've, I've really just only got, I think, one question, uh, that was uh, queued by, uh, Council Member Halison's questioning. Um, but first, just to clarify, when you're talking about the, the signal stuff we can do the next six to twelve months, are you talking about, like, signal coordination or things along those lines?

[Speaker 2]: Signal coordination, um, of course pending, you know, updating hardware software, things of that nature, but essentially coordinating, um, the corridor so that it, you know, behaves in sort of a way we, we... or improves safety, or speeds, or controls for congestion, things of that nature. Um, and then, uh, leading pedestrian intervals as well, um, those are the sort of signal treatments that are within, you know, and we do in-house.

[Speaker 4]: Got it. And, uh, so, uh, following up on on Council Member Hal's question about uh, speed limits and speed studies, um and I've-- Paul, I was trying to ask this in advance, but a member of the public had asked me, you know, I, I assume that signal prioritization for buses can be coordinated with the, uh, signal timing uh, to mitigate speeds for, uh, vehicular traffic. Um, can you just briefly speak to how... Just confirm if that's, that's correct, essentially?

[Speaker 2]: Uh, are you referring to coordinating signals so that buses travel at consistent speeds? Is that-

[Speaker 4]: Exactly.

[Speaker 2]: - essentially? Yeah, and, and I think, you know, the, the through line here is that you know, buses are operating with, with vehicles and, you know, ensuring that-... speeds, especially during peak hours, are as free-flowing in the congested areas um, helps drivers get in and out of Santa Monica, as well as transit patrons in and out of Santa Monica.

[Speaker 5]: Council Member Zuk?

[Speaker 6]: Sorry, just one question, um, that came up when we were talking about the, uh, uh parallel study occurring around the bus lanes, uh, through the Westside COG. In the parts of the proposed designs that, that, that indicate a, uh, a bulb-out where the bus would then stop in lane, uh, in order to pick up passengers, i- isn't there some... Is there not a concern that building that that treatment would actually potentially limit a bus-only lane if that were to be built in that section, seeing as then that parking lane could not easily become a bus lane if it was hardened with such a treatment?

[Speaker 2]: Yeah. The, the profile of the street west of Princeton is, it sort of starts narrowing every few blocks to a point where, um, even the parking lane being at seven feet-- Let's say, pick an intersection between 17th and 18th Street. Um, you have parking on both sides, and that parking lane is around seven feet and those driving lanes are, let's say anywhere between eleven and maybe, I don't know, around eleven feet. That parking lane is still insufficient for buses to travel there as, like, a peak hour bus-only lane, and there's not enough room in the travel lanes to squeeze them to widen that curbside lane. So in that instance, that number two lane would serve as a bus-only lane.

[Speaker 6]: Got it. Thank you.

[Speaker 5]: Okay, I have some questions that I haven't had the opportunity to go. Um I appreciate all of your hard work on this, and I, I came to some of the community engagement. Really just appreciate how, how much you've done. Um but I'm a little bit concerned just in terms of, like, what the governing principle is here, because I think this council has, um, kind of stated pretty emphatically our commitment to safety and Vision Zero. So can you just explain, is safety the governing principle here in everything that you've put forward, or is it level of service? And where did we make sacrifices based off of level of service in what we're seeing here?

[Speaker 2]: Safety is the number one approach for this project. Level of service was used as a tool to understand vehicle throughput and how the corridor functions without improvements, but also with improvements. And I alluded to one location where, o- on 20th Street, where we had initially, you know, thought of the idea of a diagonal crossing there, a scramble crossing, and then walked that back and instead favoured protected left turns because the, um, the level of service at that location would make it so that people might have to wait two or three signal cycles in front of you know, Providence St. John's to get westbound past 20th Street. So that was-

[Speaker 5]: Sorry, when you say people, you mean cars correct?

[Speaker 2]: Drivers, yeah. Um, so that was one location where we have sort of have to-- had to balance the needs, but also improve that location with, you know, signal i-- or left turn signals. Um, there are... If if you-- like, if I can remember correctly, there's about eight other locations where level of service, in some cases degrades a little bit in favour of the proposed improvements. So again, safety was the primary sort of driver for this project. Um, understanding that, you know level of service and traffic and volume throughput may, uh, be impacted, in particular, let's say, the throughs and lefts from the side street locations where we're proposing uh, several of these, uh at the-- and signalised intersections. So that's one place where we are uplifting safety and the priority of pedestrians versus drivers being able to go through or make lefts at those side streets.

[Speaker 5]: It sounds like we made decisions here in this, what was presented to us, based off of level of service over s- pedestrian safety. And isn't it true that we've had over four hundred serious injury crashes in the last te- ten years here in the city? Like, wouldn't we wanna, on the street... Yeah, wouldn't we wanna prioritise safety? I, I mean, I understand that you're saying, okay, people are gonna have to wait a few cycles, but it sounds like we're prioritising the car experience over the pedestrian experience if I'm not mistaken.

[Speaker 2]: I think that these recommendations do prioritise pedestrian safety and pedestrian crossings, um, and that's something we heard from the community. Again, a lot of the turn restrictions medians, restricting left turns, those types of things do slightly de- degrade vehicle throughput. Um, people sort of making their route in the neighbourhood and through Santa Monica Boulevard, but that is a trade-off that I think, you know, this project does carry forward as something to, to do.

[Speaker 5]: Okay, um, I have to go back to this bus-only lanes. D- Why did we, um, limit the bus-only lanes to peak hours as opposed to all the time?

[Speaker 2]: Yeah, I think that the, um, recommendation here is in line with, um, the proposed peak hour bus-only lanes, um, in the city of LA portion, where we see, um, typically the most traffic during the peak hours. So we wanna provide the buses their own lane so that they're not competing with cars on the same street. So that's why peak hour bus-only lanes make sense. Um during the rest of the time-... um, bus operations fairly steady. I believe we have around ten-minute headways outside of the peak hours, uh, so we wanna prioritize peak hour locations. Again this is something we can- we do mostly with, you know, signage, enforcement, and striping. Um, what those peak hours look like can be determined, um after we look at this, uh, Westside COG study a little bit more as well. We'll get more information, but peak hours is the recommendation because of the traffic patterns.

[Speaker 5]: So basically we're... our gold standard is the city of L.A. here?

[Speaker 2]: I failed to mention, um loading zones and on-street parking for local businesses outside of the peak hours, that's something we can, again preserve, um, for local businesses.

[Speaker 5]: Okay, I mean, I don't think anyone here is saying that we don't wanna help our local businesses. I think that that's important, but seems like we're kind of, uh I don't know, not prioritizing multimodal transit.

[Speaker 7]: Thank you, Mayor, for the question and for highlighting this. I think what you're hearing, a lot of the, the comments and the Q&A that we've heard from all of you, really highlights that all of this work is about trade-offs, right? And optimizing-

[Speaker 5]: Mm-hmm.

[Speaker 7]: - first and foremost, for safety, right?

[Speaker 5]: Yeah.

[Speaker 7]: And what Carlos has underscored is that this is a safety study.

[Speaker 5]: Right.

[Speaker 7]: The primary purpose, right, is to advance our Vision Zero objectives, and the council has, of course, clearly reiterated the primacy of that. Staff is fully aligned with that. I think to your specific question with regards to the operation of peak hour bus lanes in the stretch that the study's putting forward it really reflects when we actually get kind of the bang for our buck, so to speak, uh, with regard to current travel times. So overall, and we do have, um, you know, the, the lead of our transit planning performance here, if we really wanna nerd out on bus travel times, but overall, where we actually see the gains where the buses are moving slower now where they sort of need or really benefit the most from a bus-only lane, are those peak hours-

[Speaker 5]: Okay

[Speaker 7]: ... in both directions. The rest of the time, generally, um, Route 1 moves quite well. The metro buses move quite well, and so, yes, we would have to take away a significant amount of parking around the clock to have a twenty-four-hour bus-only lane. That's an option, but would we be actually getting the necessary benefit to our bus speed travel times in order to have a significant, potentially detriment to those businesses and those other uses? That's where those- that trade-off question, we really look at that cost-benefit analysis. So that's similar to how our existing, very successful lanes on Lincoln work. Those are actually currently one direction in peak hour. What we're proposing here is actually peak hour both directions, so that they would be bus-only lanes eastbound and westbound, morning rush and afternoon rush. So actually, kind of, uh an upgrade in some ways, uh, from the Lincoln bus-only lanes, which are currently one direction in the morning and one direction in the evenings.

[Speaker 5]: Okay, I hear you.

[Speaker 7]: Yeah.

[Speaker 5]: That- thank you. I appreciate that kind of, uh-

[Speaker 7]: Just wanted to kind of clarify that.

[Speaker 5]: Yeah, yeah. That-

[Speaker 7]: Um-

[Speaker 5]: I appreciate that. Thank you. Um so I have to bring up this McKinley Elementary issue again, um, because I don't know if I've made the point- we've made the point clear enough. Why are the pedestrian signal and raised median at Chelsea classified as Phase 2 rather than Phase 1?

[Speaker 2]: Yeah, really the Phase 2 des- designation is around the funding and the level of effort to construct the pedestrian signal curb ramps that align with the new crosswalk- the new crosswalk, and then a concrete median refuge island there. All those things require significant funding design, um, engineering, and construction. So for those reasons, we couched it into a Phase 2, because it's advantageous, um according to the Phase 2 ATP application and pr- getting the funding for that. Um it could well be within, you know the purview of the city to, um, make that a even higher priority. Uh, I think funding would be really the question behind that.

[Speaker 5]: Yeah, I mean, I think the issue is, is that what I'm hearing is like, "Well, we only have a limited amount of money, so we're gonna do, like, the low-hanging fruit first," rather than what is the biggest impact around safety. I mean, I'm just- I'm giving you feedback. That's the f- that's the vibe that I'm getting from the answers to these questions, and I think what you're hearing from us, is that we need to prioritize safety. So I guess it would be helpful to know if you could come back to us and say, um, "If we had XYZ amount of money for Phase 1 um, uh, we would be able to prioritize this, uh, intervention right now." Like is it an issue that you don't have enough money to do this?

[Speaker 8]: Madam Mayor, I might, um, um, offer a suggestion, too. I think some of this was designed with existing, um, sort of resources available. If that is a priority of the council this evening, that's one of the pieces of feedback we're looking for-

[Speaker 5]: Okay

[Speaker 8]: ... to identify a prioritization, and if um, that is the council's priority to look at Santa Monica, Chelsea, we'll definitely take that into account as we develop our capital budget moving into-

[Speaker 5]: Okay

[Speaker 8]: ... um, the, um, the early spring and then the summer.

[Speaker 5]: 'Cause it sounds like, okay, we can only do things with striping and bollards, but maybe some of these interventions require more than that, and we need to kind of assess whether... You know, what's, what what is the biggest bang for our buck truly in Phase 1? Um, okay, uh, and then I, I, I obviously sent these questions in advance, but I'm h- I'm, I'm saying it here publicly because I think these things are important to me and the folks that are listening. But on the performance outcomes, I'm a little bit concerned that the only, like key safety indicator or key performance indicator is, like, less pedestrian deaths or injuries. And I think I would like to be able to see, uh... I mean could you come back to us with additional KSIs or KPIs around speed reduction, um pedestrian delay, bus on-time performance et cetera? Like, I, I think we need some more robust me- measures through which to um-

[Speaker 3]: ... evaluate whether this is working. Would you say that that's fair?

[Speaker 2]: Absolutely, and we, we are prepared to sort of look at, you know, we did our existing conditions analysis for bus ridership, speeds. Obviously, we have crash history, um, and we've actually been looking at a counts plus methodology that um, Caltrans has sort of, uh, uh developed as through the ATP project. So if, uh, we apply and get that grant, we'd be, um, applying that for yield compliance in particular. So that's another, uh metric that we'd be able to assess, uh before and after for yield compliance, in addition to all the other metrics that I had mentioned.

[Speaker 3]: Okay, great. And I see a question from Councilmember Hall, but I think we're ready to move into... No? Comments. Okay great. Councilmember Hall. Thank you. What?

[Speaker 1]: It's a public hearing, right?

[Speaker 3]: No.

[Speaker 1]: No?

[Speaker 3]: No, the only thing that's a public hearing is 12A.

[Speaker 1]: Oh.

[Speaker 3]: 12B, sorry. Yeah.

[Speaker 1]: My bad.

[Speaker 3]: No, it's fine. Continue.

[Speaker 1]: All good. Uh, thank you, Mayor. Um so I used to live two buildings away from the intersection of Santa Monica and Yale uh, and one day I was working in my home office when I heard a crash so violent that the window to my office shook. Um, a driver had been speeding westbound on Santa Monica, lost control, ran the red at Yale and hit a palm tree with such force that she wiped the t- entire tree out and continued on with enough force to smash into our bus stop there, um, which was, like, fifteen feet further from the tree. So I, I ran outside to help. I opened the driver door. The driver kind of, like, stumbled out in a daze. Um, the car, I'm sure, was totaled. Uh, and, like she is lucky that she is alive. And, and frankly, we as a community are extremely lucky that she hit that tree, because if she had been five feet to the left or five feet to the right, she would've careened into a building that's filled with children's dentistry offices. Um and, and of course, who can forget the more recent crash, uh, that affected the Serce Speedy print shop? So, like, these are not fluke accidents, and we should expect this to happen when speed meets forgiving engineering. Um I really wanna thank y'all for the work that you've done on this. Uh, you know the crash analysis was really comprehensive. The public engagement was very thoughtful. Um, I really appreciate that you listened to neighbors who had key criticisms of the current road conditions and specific intersections, and I appreciate that many of the ideas that we discussed in the first study session, um are reflected, including the new medians the landscaping, uh, the crosswalks, the lighting, the curb bulb outs. Um, it's really clear that you listened to much of this, and, and I'm really grateful for that. Uh, but I have to say, if I'm being completely honest, it does feel a little bit like Groundhog Day up here. Um, we've now had the same conversation about parking spots and far side bus lanes and bus stops, like, multiple times now with the East Pico Boulevard Safety Project with the first iteration of the safety study last summer. And as our DOT director mentioned, like, this is about trade-offs. Um, and you mentioned that you're aligned with our thoughts on Vision Zero, but then we're also hearing that you know, you got pushback on certain safety, uh, initiatives and safety designs, you know, quote, "from the community." And while I s- stand by, like I appreciate your consultation with the community but that sounds like you're making design choices contrary to policies set by the council. Um, so, like, let us be your shield against people who don't want to see these improvements. If the voters don't like what we're doing here, they will vote us out of office. But four of us were elected in the last election, and won pretty handedly on a policy platform that promised a zealous approach to street safety and always prioritizing safety over parking or level of service or vehicular speed. You know, this corridor this, this street has had four hundred and thirty-five high-injury crashes in ten years. Pedestrians and vulnerable users are over-represented in all those injuries, and, like, that's a speed problem. And as we heard tonight, you know, we didn't even do any reductions in speed limits on Santa Monica during the last speed study. So I guess, like, I would say, and, like, quite emphatically say, underlined, bold, italicized: if an improvement reduces the likelihood of someone being killed or se-re- reduces the likelihood... Sorry, I'll start over. If an improvement reduces the likelihood of someone being killed or seriously injured, but reduces vehicle throughput, like, we support that improvement. And I'd ask my colleagues that in our motion tonight, um, if we make one, we explicitly state that as part of what we, um... as part of it, so that as we move into project design of these improvements, like, no safety cou- countermeasure will be eliminated because it worsens vehicular throughput. Um so I, I appreciate this work, I really do uh, but it feels contrary to some of the, the recent, uh, policy direction that we've given, um, especially at the last meeting, uh, with regards to Vision Zero. And, you know, like, when I asked about why we're not moving a bus stop to the far side of Twenty-Six, we were told that it was because we wanna prioritize two parking spots, uh, for a business. And like, that's a, that's a policy decision for ours- for us to make. And, like, as we've stated time and time again, we wanna prioritize the street safety and public transit over parking, public transit over private vehicles, and pedestrian and bicyclist safety over driver speed. Um and so as, as a bit of a preview to the community for our upcoming police department annual report, you know, the police department are doing their, their their fair share of, of street safety work. You know, they've stepped up traffic enforcement threefold since Chief Jacobs has taken over. Um and I wanna make sure our, our DOT and public works teams are helping make PD's job easier by designing the best streets possible. Uh so I will not be voting to approve this item tonight, and would love to see staff return in sixty days with more meaningful improvements, uh, that prioritize safety better. Thank you.

[Speaker 5]: ... Um, Council Member Zwick, I'm also prepared to say something about what I think summarizes what most of us asked about.

[Speaker 6]: I'll be brief then, um, and just say that a- again, I, I appreciate the work that's gone to this study. I think there's a lot of good work. Uh, I'm excited, um, to see the right-turn restrictions, the improvements at Chelsea, uh, a number of things like that. Uh, I am concerned that we haven't done enough to reduce lane widths as per direction from council, um that we haven't farsighted enough bus stops, you know, at intersections where it is feasible. Uh, that, um, we didn't look perhaps for more efficiencies for our bus, um, uh, bus at, at, at sections where we've identified where the bus speeds are very slow, uh, specifically eastbound in our downtown. Uh, and I would like to see an exploration of raised crossings at certain unsignalized intersections. Um the Federal Highway Administration indicates that if it's at speeds below thirty miles an hour, it's an effective way of, um, slowing traffic speeds without, um, necessarily compromising, uh buses or emergency responders if done appropriately. So those are just some thoughts of mine.

[Speaker 5]: Council Member Zarnetskaya.

[Speaker 9]: Thank you. And I agree with much of what's been said, and, um, I do also agree that I'm very grateful for all of the work that has gone into this. I recognize it's not an easy task to try to get feedback from the public and balance our council direction with the de- the demands of the people with the demands of businesses, and everybody else that uses our streets. Um I do agree about the prioritization of the intersection at Chelsea to make it safer for the kids at McKinley. I also agree about prioritizing pedestrian and cyclist safety, even if it reduces vehicular throughput, through- throughput, that's a difficult name-- word to say sometimes. Um, according to the staff report pedestrians are over-represented in fatal and severe injury crashes. So, uh, that's part of why I think we really need to pri- prioritize pedestrian and cyclist safety, because as we know, when there is a pedestrian or cyclist versus vehicle it's the people that are outside of that vehicle that are the most significantly injured or sometimes killed. Um, I noticed that in the staff report, there was a comment that not all incidents are preventable. So it said on, uh, "Notably not all incidents are preventable from a roadway design and/or safety enhancement process." And I completely understand that. People are people. We are human. Everybody makes mistakes, everyone gets distracted at times, whether we're behind the wheel of a car, whether we're on a two-wheeled vehicle, maybe a unicycle. I don't know who rides a unicycle around here, or if you're walking. Um, but I did wanna note that I don't know if anyone's read There Are No Accidents by Jesse Singer. It's a really great book about how a lot of the things that... And y- just to backtrack a little bit, I really appreciate that we're using the language of collisions and crashes as opposed to accidents, because these aren't accidents. Yes, in-- not all incidents are preventable, but significant injury and deaths are preventable when we prioritize the appropriate infrastructure. And one of the things that, uh, was noted in the book was that we can make roadways safer by designing them with the, quote unquote, "lowest common denominator user" in mind. So the person that is significantly distracted, the person who is trying to, uh, keep an eye on a million things going on all at once, to make sure that they don't get a chance to make an inadvertent mistake that can hurt or kill someone. Um, so I do wanna make sure that we're, we're prioritizing those things. Um, and I do also agree about exploring raised crossings at certain intersections. So if we're able to include all of this feedback and direction within the item um, I'm happy to vote for it, but I do wanna hear where everyone else is at.

[Speaker 5]: Councilor Ruffing.

[Speaker 4]: Yeah, I wanna, I wanna start by echoing the thanks for the work that, uh, you and the team have put into this. Um, it's-- it, it's not easy to embrace trade-offs in a complex way, and uh, I think that we're certainly aware of uh, the complexity with some of the work that goes into this. Uh, you know, ech- echoing what, uh, my colleagues have said I, I, I am supportive of making sure that we, we get this right and taking the time that we need to explore all options. But uh, for the sake of developing consensus up here, I, I think I speak for all of us when I say that I, I wouldn't want any delay to slow down anything that can be implemented now to improve safety. You know, quick build options, signalization improvement, or anything else that we can start now to kick off this work and to promote the goal of safety that I think we all want. So, uh, yeah, I'm, I'm also curious to hear where we're gonna land with a motion, if there is one, but, uh, I just wanna say that for the sake of developing consensus.

[Speaker 5]: Okay, well, I'll, I'll go, 'cause I think I actually heard, uh, some, some feedback on what folks thought up here w- was missing. Um, and I, I too-- I don't wanna say that any of these comments should be taken as anything less than appreciation. I just think we're kind of reacting to what we were given and, and I have to say we can't be given this amount of voluminous staff report, like three or four days before the meeting. We have to have some sort of briefing, because this was, uh, a lot of information to digest with a very short period of time. So w-... uh, City Manager Qi, hopefully we can rectify that in the future. Um, but I think, you know, this is very serious very thoughtful work that you all have done, um, very deliberatively, and I appreciate that you're trying to balance the trade-offs. I do get that, and I'm not trying to be, um, ungrateful, but I do think that, you know, we've all said Santa Monica Boulevard has experienced over 400 injury cra- crashes in the last decade and this council has said pretty emphatically that we're committed to clean and safe. Well, safety means pedestrian and bicycle, um, safety as well, and we're, we're pretty seriously committed to that. Um, and I think that safety needs to take precedence in what we're seeing here, and I just, quite frankly, did not um, totally feel that commitment in some of the trade-offs that were mentioned. I think that, uh, when safety improvements uh, are, are in, in conflict with vehicular lev- level of service we have to calibrate around safety, not level of service. Um, and we haven't really fully aligned with our Vision Zero policy, so that's where I'm coming from here. Um, I think I heard that... So I'm I'm gonna propose something, and you guys let me know what you think. I do think that you all need to come back in, in two months here. Uh, I think that we need to see a reduction in lane widths to approximately ten feet on average, as directed by council. We've heard that the lane widths, wi- lane widths need to be reduced, specifically 20th Street to Chelsea, Chelsea Avenue to 26th Street uh, were referenced as problems. Um, and I think we need to make all the bus stops far-sighted wherever feasible as a best practice, uh, which was also mentioned. Um, 26th and Santa Monica Boulevard i- in particular. Uh, we need to extend the bus-only lane east down in downtown from 4th Street to Lincoln. I think that was mentioned as a, a fe- a piece of feedback that w- was missing. Um, we need to explore raised crossings. I think there's some debate here on whether or not that works, but uh, you know, we've, we've looked at it and, and seen feedback, and we need to explore raised crossings at, as, at new and existing unsignalized intersections. Um, and prioritize pedestrian signal and raised crossings at Chelsea as a phase one project. Uh, we, we all, I think, kind of, uh, talked about that. We wanna protect our kids who are in school, and if we need to allocate money from the capital improvement budget to do so, we are, um, I think, amenable to that and wanna hear staff's recommendation on what really would give us the best safety solution. Um, and prioritize safety over level of service and transit over parking, to just make that emphatically clear. Um, we also want feedback on what actually can be accomplished in the next six to twelve months, not two years. Uh, so it would be helpful to know, to Council Member Raskin's point, what are the things that we're getting done right away versus what's a little bit longer term, even in the phase one? Um, that was one of my questions, and I don't think I got a clear answer to it. I see you all are, um conferring there. Um, and then I think we need to reevaluate everything in phase one for the highest impact interventions, and when we say impact, we mean safety. Um and then we need to get feedback from, uh City Manager Qi as to what we need from the capital improvement budget, and then we'll make the decision as to whether the trade-offs are, are needed based on the budget ask. And we wanna see some real KSIs that are gonna be tracked, uh, and reported out post-implementation. Uh, and then finally, I think you heard from Council Members Zernak Sky and others that we wanna pri- prioritize pedestrian recall over push buttons, uh, and so coming back with those recommendations. And so, um, I would say that I would make a motion that we, um, discuss this again in two months, uh, with that feedback incorporated.

[Speaker 1]: I'll second that.

[Speaker 5]: Is there any other discussion on that?

[Speaker 4]: Sorry, just to make sure we're on the same page. So I, I I don't think this is the intent of what you're saying, but we're, we're not gonna slow down the work that's gonna be started now, today, between now and coming back in two months?

[Speaker 5]: Sure, but, um, City Manager Qi, are we slowing anything down by asking for this?

[Speaker 8]: The um... I- i- in essence, no, we can do both. The, um, feedback tonight's been clear. I think staff has an understanding what the council is intending. Um, what's presented before you, though, really ultimately constitutes concepts that we're thinking about. Um, it is not final design, per se. It's not the design of the street. It's not the design of the actual capital project-

[Speaker 4]: Mm-hmm

[Speaker 8]: ... that we're working on. And so if the direction is continue to mature concept plan, certainly it takes some time to do that. Um, we would like to concurrently move towards, um, all of the design work for implementing the actual project in '27, is when construction currently is internally slated to start, and so we do need to move towards design processes at some point. I think we've heard all of the feedback clearly. So if, um, what I might suggest, if the council would like us to maybe synthesize what we're hearing, bring it back to you, maybe even sooner than in sixty days, as it relates to design concepts you want implemented into the permanent design, we can compile those suggestions, bring it back, um, relatively quickly, and then if we have concurrence with the council, um, maybe move into actual design of what the capital project will look like.

[Speaker 5]: Yeah, I don't think anything here is intended to slow it down. My understanding is that today was just concepts, and that there wasn't anything ready to, like we're not putting a, out a bollard tomorrow. Um, so yeah, that, that's, um, I think, um, synthesizes well what we're intending to do, and, uh, we have a, a motion and a second.

[Speaker 8]: The only thing that maybe I'd suggest, I think the motion was within sixty days bring something back as it relates to updating the concepts. Would the council be amenable to maybe considering that the direction is synthesize the feedback we've received tonight, and identify more clearly for the council the specific improvements we've heard that we would integrate into a permanent design? Um, we could probably get that done a lot more quickly than in sixty days and would likely allow us to transition maybe into something a little bit more, um substantive as it relates to the actual design work.

[Speaker 5]: Yeah, I would say, um, in no more than sixty days. So if you wanna bring it back sooner, that's great. Council Member Hall?

[Speaker 1]: ... I think my concern with that is that this document ends up becoming the base safety study for the entire project, every project that flows from it. And so I, I would feel more comfortable if this specific document came back to us with updated concepts, um as opposed to general guidance given that then gets incorporated in later-

[Speaker 8]: Certainly.

[Speaker 1]: Project designs.

[Speaker 8]: Understood.

[Speaker 5]: Okay. So I think we're ready to vote.

[Speaker 9]: Sure.

[Speaker 5]: Yes, Council Member Zernosky?

[Speaker 9]: I just had a question, 'cause I wanna make sure I'm on understanding this motion and understanding the direction. Um, so the motion is to incorporate the feedback that we have given into this specific document, bring the document back, and then be able to move forward with any design specific, um, actions?

[Speaker 5]: Yes, with one amendment that they're gonna work on design concurrent, like with some of the, uh, items that are already kind of in progress-

[Speaker 8]: There's-

[Speaker 5]: -so that we're not gonna slow down anything.

[Speaker 8]: There's certain things that we can certainly work on related to the capital project-

[Speaker 5]: Right

[Speaker 8]: ... outside of the specific treatments that have been discussed tonight or tactics. So we'll, um, certainly think about how we do that internally.

[Speaker 9]: Okay, and they would-- would they be able to bring it back to us in less than sixty days, should it be ready sooner?

[Speaker 5]: Yes.

[Speaker 9]: Okay.

[Speaker 5]: Yes.

[Speaker 9]: So we'd be able to get moving on trying to make Santa Monica Boulevard safer?

[Speaker 5]: Yeah, and I don't think-

[Speaker 9]: Okay

[Speaker 5]: ... anything-- we're not precluded from having, like, individual briefings in the interim period as well, just to make sure everyone's on the same page.

[Speaker 9]: Okay. Thank you.

[Speaker 5]: Okay, let's vote.

[Speaker 3]: Council Member Negrete?

[Speaker 1]: Yes.

[Speaker 3]: Council Member Hall?

[Speaker 1]: Yes.

[Speaker 3]: Council Member Raskin?

[Speaker 8]: Yes.

[Speaker 3]: Mayor Pro Tem Swick?

[Speaker 1]: Yes.

[Speaker 3]: Council Member Snell?

[Speaker 1]: Yes.

[Speaker 3]: Council Member Zernosky?

[Speaker 9]: Yes.

[Speaker 3]: And Mayor Terrosis.

[Speaker 5]: Yes. Great, um, we will now move on to agenda item 12B and, uh, thank you all for your, uh efforts. Really appreciate it. We have three public comments on agenda item 12B. Uh, just a, as a matter of process, do we wanna hear the staff report and then take the public comment since it's a public hearing?

[Speaker 3]: You did yes.

[Speaker 5]: Yes? Okay, great.

[Speaker 3]: You already have it in there?

[Speaker 5]: ... Lover's going to get that talk.

[Speaker 10]: Great, um good evening, Council. Uh, Steve Mizukami as well as, Carrie Fukui, and we're here from City Planning, and, uh, tonight we'll be presenting, uh, what is this next phase of zoning amendments related to economic recovery, growth, and opportunity. And this is consistent with the city's new realignment plan and also with council's direction to bring forth, uh, current IZO standards for permanent adoption. Uh, tonight's proposal is the latest phase of what we anticipate will be an ongoing series of zoning amendments, uh, focused on economic growth and opportunity. Uh, the City Council uh, continues to provide support to the business community that has been very critical, uh, for economic recovery, um allowing for greater flexibility in our land uses and review procedures for both new and existing, uh, Santa Monica businesses. Uh, most recently, the City Council adopted zoning amendments back in uh, August of last year, uh, permanently adopting portions of the current downtown IZO, uh, which really focused on alcohol permit streamlining. Uh, since then, uh, staff has continued to look at additional, uh, streamlining and expanding, uh, the scope to the entire downtown, as well as the outside of the downtown in district citywide. Uh, we've received a great amount of positive feedback, uh, from brokers and the business community on the streamlining changes to land use review. Uh, not only that, uh, it provides greater certainty for these prospective businesses, uh, and also signals that the city is open for business uh, but we've seen, uh, businesses come through the permitting process, uh, that have benefited from these changes. And so the feedback and the results, uh, are telling us that our streamlining strategies, uh, in the downtown are working. Uh, so tonight's proposal comes in two parts. Uh, this slide gives a brief overview, uh, of tonight's agenda. Uh, first, the formal adoption of all current, um, IZOs. Uh second would be consideration of new changes within the downtown, as well as in the citywide districts, uh, based on the similar strategy that we've taken for the downtown IZOs. Uh, and we also have four policies for the council's, uh consideration tonight, uh, related to, uh retail size, uh, pub crawls, uh, taproom closing hours, and the, uh, potential reestablishment of bars on Main Street. So I'll quickly go through the four. Uh we have four IZOs and a set of emergency order provisions that staff is re- uh recommending for permanent adoption. Uh that is the downtown IZO. We also have an IZO on sidewalk dining as well as massage. Uh, these were, um, through the years created as IZOs, and we're, uh, seek-- uh proposing to permanently adopt those standards. Uh, we also have a resource recovery and recycling IZO, um, that, uh Ross will be able to go into a little bit further detail later tonight. Uh, and, uh, we also have the adoption of the Palisades Emergency Order, uh supporting the relocation of schools and daycare facilities.... Uh, so additional changes in the downtown. We are proposing uh, to further streamline land review uh, land use review, which we've done through the current IZO. Uh, but we're also looking to expand our alcohol exemptions for commercial uses that are listed here, uh, that are already available to the Third Street Promenade area. Um, and so we're looking to expand this to the rest of the downtown area. Uh staff also proposes to allow, uh existing non-conforming pawnshops, uh, to relocate anywhere in the downtown area except for Ocean Avenue. Uh, the council had considered this proposal last year uh, and did not move forward with the change at that time. Uh, so staff is reintroducing this, uh, change today, uh and wanna clarify that this is in response to an existing long-term Santa Monica business, uh, that would help support their business operations. Uh, as we have proposed the language, this simply would allow for any existing pawnshops to relocate anywhere in the downtown and will not result in any new pawnshops. Uh, next, uh, Carrie will be going over uh, the strategy behind the changes and also provide an overview of the new changes citywide.

[Speaker 11]: Hello, good evening. Uh, thanks for having us tonight. I'm Carrie Fukui, acting principal planner. Um, as Steve mentioned I will now be jumping into the citywide amendments. Um, before we get into what we are proposing tonight, I just wanted to go briefly over our general strategy of how we made these, uh, changes in our proposal before you. Um, so we really try to look at these five topics here. So one building on the successes of recent changes made downtown. Um, targeting limitations and ground floor restrictions that are seen as barriers in what we've heard from businesses, existing and new. Um, also make sure that comparable uses have the same limitations and restrictions in the land use process. Uh, we'll also look to remove or downgrade entitlement processes that are time-consuming expensive for applicants, and that we see can be handled by the zoning administrator-

[Speaker 0]: by the planning director or by staff. Um, and all of this is kind of happening in a lens where we're seeing neighborhood commercial as, you know, different from our other uh, boulevards. Uh, there's more preservation of ground floor activity. So everything we do kind of trickles down from downtown to, that's the most flexible, to the boulevards, and then down to the neighborhood commercial zone. Um, before jumping into the changes again, I just want to go over our entitlement process. Um, so I'll just go over these briefly from the hardest entitlement to the easiest. So starting with a conditional use permit, um, you'll see it's pretty expensive, about ten thousand dollars for a land use permit twenty thousand dollars for alcohol. This goes in front of the planning commission for a public hearing and is appealed to you, the city council. Um, approval of this requires, uh, findings, these eight findings in the code. Um, and this is significant staff time, applicant time coordination before the hearing and can take about anywhere from three to five months. Uh, next is a minor use permit, so a step down. It's cheaper at eight thousand dollars. It's in front of the zoning administrator for a public hearing. Uh, appeals to this go to the planning commission. Um, they're required to meet the same eight findings as a conditional use permit, so the threshold for approval is the same as a CUP. Um, and it takes much less staff and applicant prep time uh, before going to a hearing, about two months. Uh, next is a special limitation. So we have limitations that apply to our land uses. They're standard conditions that must be met, whether the use is permitted by right or requires an entitlement. Some of these limitations uh, you know, hit on things like max tenant size, uh, parking and loading requirements, uh, residential buffers, or ground floor restrictions. And then finally, we end with just a P in the table, which is permitted by right. The applicant just needs to get a business license. So jumping into the changes, the first thing we did was looked at how we could simplify the review process, and the first thing we saw was, where can we downgrade a conditional use permit to a minor use permit? And to do this, we really looked at what uses have impacts that are easily identifiable, typical for that use, and can be mitigated with simple conditions. A lot of these uses that we looked at, the impacts are related to noise, parking, loading, access, RRR, all things that we believe can be handled, you know, at the zoning administrator or with staff guidance. Um, these uses, we still see a value in a public hearing to address any community concerns, so that's why the MUP would be reviewed in front of the zoning administrator. And again, as I said, appealable to the PC with the eight required findings. Um, an example of a use where we downgraded CUP to MUP is small-scale facility. This is kind of a catch-all for a range of commercial entertainment businesses, a lot of what we see for arcades, uh, kind of pop-up, experiential things that we see on the promenade. Um under the current regulations, these require a conditional use permit along all the boulevards. Um, we assess this use very typical and common to, like, a general retail use and as impactful as that, and don't see how that would rise to the level of a conditional use permit. So this is one example where we downgraded this to an MUP, because this use can kind of encompass so many different things. We still think it should have some level of review. Um, so that's an example of that downgrade there. Um, next, we simplified even further, where some uses went from a CUP and MUP to just by right permitted, they just need a business license. Um, we really looked at in what instances an entitlement was used as a deterrent for use rather than a way to evaluate compatibility of a use. Because a conditional use permit, a minor use permit, it's a permitted use with conditions to ensure it's compatible rather than something we just use to say yes or no. Um, so we looked at specific conditions on recently approved entitlements to see you know, what were the greatest concerns what were the typical conditions placed on these entitlements, and again, a lot were related to parking, loading, and operations. Um, so we also see this as something that could be just required and handled at the staff level. Um, another thing we looked at here was removing inconsistent application of entitlements. So there were a lot of comparable uses that had to go through a different process, um, which could have just happened over time as the code was created. So we just try to look at those uses and target them and make sure they're all treated the same. Uh, one example of this one... Let's see. So we actually are streamlining offices, starting in the downtown, where offices are really permitted everywhere by right. Um, under new-- under current code, all new construction of office uses requires a conditional use permit on the boulevards. Um, so we saw this as pretty onerous, um, and we also looked at existing entitlements that were recently issued, and a lot of the special conditions were related to, uh, building design or kind of how it interacts with the street, not necessarily around the business function or the operations there. So this is one example of where we changed a use from a MUP, CUP to straight by right. And again, we looked at NC a little differently, where we saw this as you know, we want to maintain kind of the active use feel of Main Street in the smaller scale, so we left some of those uh, restrictions in for there. And next, we looked at simplifying restrictions and limitations for the ground floor. Um, so these are limitations in the land use table that could put restrictions on how big a tenant space can be or the actual frontage of that storefront. Um, this is forced, as we've seen through business license review applicants to seek loopholes. They face very time-consuming and expensive process. They redesign their floor plans, or they chop up tenant spaces, all to just end up in this space anyways. So we looked at this and, you know, where could we remove this, and where will it not have a major impact on our boulevards? Um, and we just want to note that throughout all of this design review is still part of the process, so any kind of concerns about uh, frontage or building design, that will still be handled through the ARV.... Um so an example of this is, uh, banks actually. So in the downtown, the DCP previously restricted bank frontages to twenty feet. Um, and on the boulevards, we had frontage restrictions for things like retail and general personal services which are nail salons, dry cleaners tailors, all very common uses. Um, we reviewed these, and we don't see any real mitigation that that limitation does on an impacted use. Um, so we removed these you know, and it just definitely helps with re-tenanting of some long-term vacant spaces. So next here, I'm gonna jump into some more specific examples of what we did. Um retail strategy is one that had some, uh bigger changes for the city. Currently you'll see at the top row our existing regulations. Sm-- uh, retail is broken into at least three categories of small medium, large. All throughout existing staff proposal and the planning commission's proposal, everything small scale within that category is permitted by right. Um, what we're really seeing change is here in this middle column, in medium scale, where right now, existing regulations require a CUP. Staff proposal is to change that either to a minor use permit when close to residential neighborhoods or just permitted by right with approval of a parking loading operations plan. Um, and I wanna note in the record that the staff report actually misidentified planning commission's recommendation on this. So this clarification here is that they actually weren't changing the definition, they just wanted to change the threshold of which a CUP is required. So in a medium-scale retail, everything between twenty-five and fifty thousand square feet is approved through a minor use permit, similar to staff proposal, but above fifty and up to eighty requires a CUP. So the difference here between staff and PC is that staff's is a little more flexible, where anything within medium scale is just a MUP or a PLOP. So that's our first policy question tonight that we'll bring back up later. Um, if a CUP should be required for anything over fifty thousand square feet for medium-scale retail, uh, this means that that CUP is required. Anything between twenty-five and fifty is more flexible with the MUP. Um, so the yes would be aligned with planning commission's recommendation of the CUP between fifty and eighty, or a no would be with staff's recommendation. And next, I am gonna go over, uh, grocery stores. So this was another pretty big change that we made through the city. Existing regulations require a CUP for any grocery store over fifteen thousand square feet, and that counts for a grocery store going into an existing building or new construction. Um, we've seen this as a barrier over the last year for difficulty of re-tenanting very large tenant spaces. We have that Rite Aid site that's over fifteen thousand, and a grocery store came to us and was looking at how they can break up the space. Um, so our proposal is really addressing that. Um, you know, and we've heard from our mo- partners in mobility that some existing grocery stores, the biggest issues are the loading, the parking, and the operations. So that's why you'll see in both staff and PC proposals, will always require the approval of a PLOP for any new grocery store in the city now. Um, and staff proposal is for new construction, a minor use permit only when the grocery store proposes greater than twenty-five thousand square feet. Anything below that is permitted by right with the PLOP. PC went above and beyond and, uh, increased that threshold to thirty thousand square feet with staff support. Uh, a lot of this was based off research we had done that showed the average and median size of grocery stores was between twenty-five and twenty-eight thousand, so that thirty just really makes sure it captures everything. And with that, I'm gonna pass it back to Steve to go over alcohol.

[Speaker 1]: Great, so this next, uh, section is, uh staff's proposed changes to our alcohol permits. Um, so first, uh, we are proposing to first downgrade the baseline uh, conditional use permit required for all of our alcohol permits, uh, and we would be downgrading that from a CUP to an MUP, minor use permit. Uh, expess- except that bars would continue to require a conditional use permit, and that was, uh something that was recommended by the planning commission. Uh, the alcohol-related suspensions, uh, per the emergency order, um, are proposed to be formally removed as alcohol, uh requirements in our permits moving forward. And we've also created a process where existing businesses can also simply request that those same conditions be removed from their current alcohol permits. Uh, a lot of these uh, uh, regulations kinda spanned, uh many years in the past, so there's a lot of permits out there that they are complying, uh, you know, subject to these requirements. We wanna allow for existing businesses to be able to come in and also uh, get that, as well as new, uh, new applications for permits. Uh, the planning commission, uh, did recommend to maintain the p- uh, the pub crawl restriction uh, and they expressed, uh, some safety concerns with participating patrons as they're jumping from business to business. Um, and so policy question number two for council, uh, is whether it would be appropriate to continue the allowance of the pub crawl events, uh, consistent with the emergency order. Um, so, uh, next is our alcohol, uh exemptions. So, uh, we've taken a similar approach with expanding, uh, alcohol exemptions to districts outside of the downtown, uh, but with a much shorter list of potential uses in comparison. Uh staff presented this, uh, concept to the planning commission, uh, as policy questions in which the commission was supportive of. Uh, so this would include uh, food courts being added, um, and businesses such as art galleries, uh, day spas, beauty shops, uh, retail shops that are not typically associated with alcohol-related issues. Uh, these new businesses would be able to apply for an alcohol exemption permit. Um-... Um taprooms is a new category, uh, being introduced, uh, with this group. Uh, it would be limited to the service of beer and wine, uh, only, so we would not have spirits as a part of that definition. Um and this looks to address, like, newer trends of businesses such as, um JuneShine on Main Street, that is considered a bar, uh, since they, they they do not have food service. Uh, so this group is also may include wine bars in this category. Uh, and we're looking to provide an easier path for these more innocuous businesses, uh, that do get caught up under the bar classification. Uh, the Planning Commission supported the addition of this taproom category, uh, and recommended a closing hour of nine PM for these businesses. Uh, considering that the closing hours for alcohol exemptions for restaurants are at twelve AM, uh staff does propose the closing time to align with these restaurants for consistency. Uh, so policy question number three: uh, should the closing times be nine PM uh, or twelve AM for taprooms seeking an alcohol exemption permit? Uh, next category, moving on from alcohol uh, here is a list of minor changes that simplify standards for these various uses. Uh, I will, uh, highlight one. Uh, all forms of exercise and physical fitness uh, for example, would now be permitted by right. Uh, whereas in most cases right now, a conditional use permit is required. Um, uh, we'll go on to our last policy question. So following the Planning Commission's review, um, and recommendation of the proposed amendments uh, staff proposes an additional change uh, in response to the condit- uh Commission's overall discussion about alcohol. Uh, and we do propose to allow existing bar establishments located in the NC district on Main Street, uh, that have been closed for more than twelve months to be able to have the right to reopen. Uh, currently, non-conforming standards would require a bar, uh, that has been closed for more than twelve months to convert to a conforming use in the district. Uh, since bars are not permitted in this district, a new bar, uh, would not be able to be approved, and therefore this change seeks to preserve the opportunity for existing bars to reopen and avoid permanent termination. Now, this is the same provision that is currently in place, uh, that we have for bars within the downtown. Uh, and for other, uh... We also have this available for other types of uses, uh, uh, mainly like restaurants and retail, uh, to be able to allow for those, uh, that were uh, having a difficult time for reoccupying, to be able to reoccupy provided that there, uh, isn't a conforming use, and that's the last known use of that tenant space. Uh, this proposal would also help maintain the variety of commercial uses, uh, that Main Street has historically provided. Uh, so pol- uh, policy question number four: Uh should, uh, previously... Oh, yeah. Previously, uh, operating bars that have closed in the NC district be allowed to reopen if the bar has been closed for more than twelve months? Yeah just for one second. Okay. Sorry, it looks like a couple of slides were not included, but I just wanted to go over a couple of new revisions that were not included in your packet, or I guess I should say, uh, removal of amendments, uh related to the trash rooms, uh, for our R requirements. Um the proposed amendments, we're looking to increase them. This largely was started with the self-certification program. But as we moved into codifying them into the code, we've heard from developers and architects regarding some of their concerns regarding this increase. So at this time, staff is acr- actually recommending to just revert back to what they are right now. Um, so to not kind of move forward with the amendments in your packet, uh, to give staff more time to more holistically look at kind of all trash operations before we kinda propose any additional recommendations. So just to kind of, on the record, to read it, it'd be remove- it would be going back to twenty-one feet and seven point five feet for three to s- ten units, and keeping the twenty-one-foot width for eleven to twenty units. And similarly, that would actually go along for both the commercial and, or non-residential and residential um, tables. So sorry, we didn't have those slides, but just wanted to, uh, go over those quick edits. All right, so that, uh, concludes the staff's report. Um, we recommend that council adopt the proposed amendments, uh tonight, as discussed in the staff report, and our staff is available for any questions.

[Speaker 2]: Uh, don't, don't all jump at once. Council Member Zwick, go ahead. He's really quick at getting in there.

[Speaker 3]: Um, do we do public comment after, after our own questions? Is that what we do?

[Speaker 2]: Oh, thank you.

[Speaker 3]: No, is that... I'm sorry.

[Speaker 2]: Uh, Ms. Anderson Warren, should we do public comment now?

[Speaker 4]: Yeah, generally, generally, you, uh, take questions of staff first, and then-

[Speaker 3]: Okay.

[Speaker 4]: Because then the public-

[Speaker 2]: Thank you, Director Warren

[Speaker 4]: ... has the benefit of those-

[Speaker 2]: Got it

[Speaker 4]: ... um, questions and answers.

[Speaker 2]: Okay, great.

[Speaker 3]: Okay.

[Speaker 2]: So questions only now.

[Speaker 3]: Okay. Well, just slip in that I'm really jazzed about all this. Uh but, uh, on the topic of questions, uh so I just wanna parse through some of the CUP, MUP, alcohol exemption elements here. Uh w- we're moving to MUP for most of these uh, establishments that protect-- that could potentially now qualify for an alcohol exemption under certain standards. Is that correct?

[Speaker 1]: Yeah, so that's the change from CUP to MUP. So all of our alcohol permits really just start off at... Currently, right now it's a CUP, but we are proposing they start off at an MUP. Uh, if an al- uh, if a business can, uh, agrees to, um the alcohol exemption criteria, they can propo- uh, apply for that, get that permit, and then they wouldn't have a, a minor use permit.

[Speaker 3]: Okay, um, it seems like we're-... tr- dancing around, trying to allow these, all these things more easily, but still saying essentially that bars are not allowed anywhere, essentially?

[Speaker 1]: Yeah, it was a, uh, policy question that we did talk to the commission for. Uh, it was one use that they still felt, uh, that still warranted, um, some, uh discretionary review. Um the, any of the processes for bars, uh have always traditionally required CUPs in the past. Um, so, but it is a question that we've, we've asked.

[Speaker 3]: Okay, yeah, just 'cause it's like we're we're, we're trying- we're introducing this new category called taprooms, which is great. We- we're, we're doing this dance to keep these existing bars that we like, we're trying to keep them in service, but we're still making it illegal, essentially. And I'm, I'm curious, uh, uh, i- there i- I guess, is there a possibility, just so I understand maybe for the future, whereby there could be a MUP process for bars that if they meet specific standards related to noise, uh other things of that nature, outdoor patios, I'm not sure, you know, distance from residential uses, could then qualify for an alcohol exemption through that process?

[Speaker 1]: Yeah, if the council would like to give staff direction. Um, again, this is, uh just kind of the beginning as we're reaching citywide, so there's gonna be a lot of opportunities in the future, uh for us to kind of self-correct or even further enhance changes that we make tonight. Uh, so yeah, that could be some research that we could take a look at that.

[Speaker 3]: Okay, awesome. Um, I'm, I'm trying to hold back from all the excitement I have generally about this. I'm just focusing on the questions. Uh there's some ongoing restrictions on the office campus related to certain... a number of uses, uh, that are restricted to twenty-five percent of office campus. Uh, s- I think they're termed Special Limitation 6 on a number of uses, like you can have a grocery, but not a bodega, or I don't know what.

[Speaker 0]: Yeah, so, you know, we had heard this, and we saw those limitations, and we were looking at untangling that, and it started to get kind of unwieldy and turned into like, a bigger look at, you know, how are we gonna address these land use regulations for this whole office campus district. Um, so it's something that we wanna bring forward in a next iteration.

[Speaker 3]: Okay, awesome. Yeah, 'cause I-- obviously now that housing is an allowed use, it feels like we wanna allow-

[Speaker 0]: Right

[Speaker 3]: ... other uses that can compliment that.

[Speaker 0]: Definitely. Neighborhood commercial serving uses and things like that.

[Speaker 3]: Yeah. Okay.

[Speaker 1]: Mm-hmm.

[Speaker 3]: Thank you. And then trash room, I won't go into it. It sounds like we're not really dealing with that right now. I would say that I do appreciate that we, I think, are trying... That we are making changes. I I think, are we still making changes related to larger projects? 'Cause that was something that I think was appreciated regarding that being a more streamlined process-

[Speaker 5]: Yes

[Speaker 3]: - for larger projects.

[Speaker 5]: We did remove the requirement for a public works director to kind of decide for the larger projects to kind of all hone into this table, so there's more clear objective standards for all projects moving forward.

[Speaker 3]: Got it. And, and then on the smaller ones I appreciate that we're sort of maybe gonna look at that more holistically.

[Speaker 5]: Yes.

[Speaker 3]: Uh, i- I've heard that other jurisdictions sometimes look more at, like, square footage as opposed to specific dimensions as a way to maybe allow for more flexibility. Is that correct?

[Speaker 5]: Yeah, and we've started those conversations.

[Speaker 3]: Okay, awesome.

[Speaker 5]: Yeah.

[Speaker 3]: Thank you so much.

[Speaker 6]: Great. Council Member Zernitzky, uh...

[Speaker 7]: Thank you. Um I'm so excited about these, these, uh cleanups. Uh, I wanted to get some clarification because I, I think I'm not understanding something here when it comes to the prohibition on pub crawls, because I know we have some pub crawls as events throughout the year. What is, what is this prohibition on pub crawls?

[Speaker 1]: So the pro, uh, the pub crawl prohibition um-

[Speaker 6]: I mean, we're happy-

[Speaker 1]: ... uh, th- they're a part of, um, our alcohol permits kind of just over the years. Um, this would be a permi- a prohibition, as it currently is, uh, on businesses from holding events where, you know, you can have a couple of businesses on Main Street or, or whatnot, get together, create an event, and have a pub crawl. So the restriction just doesn't allow for the alcohol permit holders to be able to kinda organize or participate in something. Now, fast-forward to where we are currently today, and pub crawls, we've seen these events. We've have a handful on Main Street that we've seen. Uh, those are a little bit more organized but nonetheless, uh, we do have an environment, such as the EZ, the downtown for all of our patrons to be able to walk down the sidewalk with alcohol within the Third Street Promenade. So we do have something of a change of policy, and I think, uh, the council, um, wanted to include these suspensions for these more um, arduous type of conditions on our current operators, and so in the emergency order, it's been suspended, um, as kind of that change of, of thought process. So as we're looking to, uh, you know, get these into the code permanently, um, you know, staff had pr- uh, recommended that pub crawls also be included in this batch of, uh, removals. Uh, but it-- the planning commission did share some concerns about, uh, overall safety.

[Speaker 7]: So if we were to, um remove a prohibition on pub crawls, does that just mean that the, uh, alcohol license holders would be able to be part of a group that organizes or potentially manages a pub crawl?

[Speaker 1]: That's correct.

[Speaker 7]: Mm.

[Speaker 1]: Yeah.

[Speaker 7]: But it wouldn't preclude any third parties from, uh working with them to organize something? I mean, uh, d- I assume they currently work with them, right? They have to.

[Speaker 1]: Right. It would not preclude, uh anybody from preventing pub crawls.

[Speaker 7]: Got it. Yeah, I-... I remember in Berlin I went on an alternative pub crawl once. It was really, it was really fun! We went to an absinthe bar, we went to a, a tabletop tennis bar, and went to a couple others. Um, and, you know, maybe folks might decide to create some sort of themed pub crawl to highlight places. Um does this- do these amendments also- would these amendments also allow for things like corner stores and and things like that? Or is that potentially some part of a future update?

[Speaker 0]: Um, so you mean like convenience markets and things like that?

[Speaker 7]: Yeah.

[Speaker 0]: Yeah, so we've released the use, um especially in the downtown, it's just more about the alcohol permit, so that's a very separate, entire... You know, it's a business, and then the alcohol approval. So alcohol is where we're still holding the CUP, uh, for convenience markets.

[Speaker 7]: Got it. So, so they would- so if a corner store, bodega-like, um establishment wanted to sell some sort of either liquor or beer-

[Speaker 0]: Mm

[Speaker 7]: ... or wine or whatever, they would still need to get a CUP?

[Speaker 0]: Yeah, yeah, that's correct, in front of the Planning Commission.

[Speaker 7]: Do they... Are all, uh, to make sure I'm understanding, are all establishments that sell alcohol required to also get a permit from the alcoholic beverage-

[Speaker 0]: ABC, yeah.

[Speaker 7]: Yeah.

[Speaker 0]: That's correct.

[Speaker 7]: So there's-

[Speaker 0]: They get their license, and they show that when they submit their application.

[Speaker 7]: So there's still that check at the state level, regardless of whether or not we have some sort of CUP versus MUP restriction?

[Speaker 0]: Right, right. They go through them as well.

[Speaker 7]: Okay. And I saw an example of, um, of a venue that had to get a CUP to serve alcohol, was, uh, The Crow, the comedy, um uh theater. Is that the right word? Anyway uh, w- so if we were to implement these changes would it retroactively, mm, allow those uses for the existing ones that had a CUP, and if they had to move or something like that, would it... How would that work?

[Speaker 0]: It, it wouldn't apply retroactively, but then they would be able to come through and apply for this administrative process which, you know, happens very quickly just with staff and then a few weeks. Um as long as they're okay with the conditions, the standard conditions for that use. Um, you know, sometimes the CUP is a little more flexible because, you know, they can kinda negotiate the... or fight for their hours or whatever they're looking for. Um, so it really would just depend on what works best for them, but they would have to apply again for a new AE.

[Speaker 7]: Okay, but we would, we would be able to uh, create standards for hours and things like that under the MUP that wouldn't mmm, that could, that, that could potentially not negatively impact those types of businesses?

[Speaker 0]: Right.

[Speaker 7]: Okay. All right. Thank you.

[Speaker 8]: All right Council Member Hall.

[Speaker 9]: Thank you.

[Speaker 8]: Yeah, Council, oh.

[Speaker 9]: Thank you, Mayor. Um, would you mind pulling up the policy question slide please? Can you very succinctly state what the staff recommendation is for each of these and what the Planning Commission recommendation is for each of these?

[Speaker 0]: Yeah. So for number one, uh, what is shown is a Planning Commission recommendation. So a CUP is required for medium-scale retail between fifty and eighty thousand. Staff recommendation is anything within that twenty-five to eighty range is either an MUP, if it's adjacent to residential or just a PLOP. You know, majority of our commercial parcels on the boulevards are adjacent to residential, so it would require that. Um and then sec- do you wanna take the other ones?

[Speaker 1]: Yeah, so question number two, the Planning Commission, uh, recommended to maintain the current, uh, prohibition on pub crawls. Uh, question number three, uh, the Planning Commission recommended-

[Speaker 9]: Sorry, what's staff re- staff's recommendation on two?

[Speaker 1]: Oh, I'm sorry. Uh, staff recommendation is to, um to eliminate this-

[Speaker 9]: Okay

[Speaker 1]: ... along with all the others. Uh question number three, should the hours be nine PM? So the Planning Commission recommended a closing hour of nine PM, and staff is recommending twelve AM to sync up with restaurants.

[Speaker 9]: Okay.

[Speaker 1]: Uh, and question number four was not something that was discussed with the Planning Commission. This question or this proposed change evolved after kind of their discussion in terms of how we can improve, um, our existing businesses. So this is, uh, a question just for the council.

[Speaker 9]: And does staff have a recommendation on number four?

[Speaker 1]: Uh, yes, we do recommend, uh, allowing for bars, uh, to be able to reopen if they're closed more than twelve months.

[Speaker 9]: Okay, thank you.

[Speaker 8]: Council Member Negrete.

[Speaker 7]: Um, okay, trying to keep things brief to move it along. I just had two questions. Um, are barsicles, I was just asking, and I wanted to ask out loud. We used to have a barsicle that was on Main Street, and you could only drink on the actual... It's like a people pedaling. It's like a big bike. Um so I was just curious, like, how that fits into this, and then maybe related and second to that, is, um, cart- the question has been asked many times about bringing it back, and then carts on the promenade like, if an already established establishment can have, like, sort of outdoor cart, like seasonally or something?

[Speaker 8]: Yeah, yeah. Um, so on the cart issue, actually, that's what, um, Cabo Cantina does right now.

[Speaker 7]: Yeah.

[Speaker 8]: You know, they serve direct-

[Speaker 7]: Yeah

[Speaker 8]: ... to the sidewalk. Um, and we facilitate that. That's allowed because of the entertainment zone. You can have open containers straight into the public right of way. It was actually a very creative um, idea, and the, uh, license agreement was updated for that. Um, we have heard interest in kind of like a mobile beverage cart, uh, idea, um, you know, that we're we're looking at. Um, someone had, had proposed that, but that's certainly a- allowed. Um, and it also allows, uh, uh DTSM also, um, on the promenade, for example, to put, um, uh, kind of like brand activation, you know, with alcohol service. So sort of like that pop-up experience as part of the entertainment zone. Um, so that's typically where we see that kind of like-... you know, mobile beverage cart, um, kind of experience. On the barcycle, that is an interesting thing. I, I wanna say that it's like, yes-

[Speaker 10]: We had it. I've experienced it.

[Speaker 8]: Yes. No, no, we have one. We haven't-- we don't have one operating right now. I think we-

[Speaker 10]: No, they, I don't-

[Speaker 8]: Yeah.

[Speaker 10]: They stopped years ago, and-

[Speaker 8]: Yeah. I don't know if it was, like liability reasons or something, but-

[Speaker 10]: But they said years ago there was some issue-

[Speaker 8]: Yeah

[Speaker 10]: ... 'cause it was on-

[Speaker 8]: Yeah

[Speaker 10]: ... Main Street.

[Speaker 8]: Yeah.

[Speaker 10]: Um-

[Speaker 8]: Yeah.

[Speaker 10]: Let's bring it back.

[Speaker 8]: Yeah.

[Speaker 10]: Um what about pedicabs? Sorry, maybe we're taking it too far.

[Speaker 8]: Yeah.

[Speaker 10]: Um can I just, 'cause since I'm the last questions, can I just say my comments and then go back, so I don't have to go back in the queue, or do you have any?

[Speaker 6]: Sure, I have one. I have one.

[Speaker 10]: Oh, sorry, we have public comment.

[Speaker 6]: Yeah.

[Speaker 10]: Okay, so to... We're not really sure about barcycles. And carts are directly attached to an already established establishment, right? Not... I just wanna make sure people can't just come in and set up a cart, 'cause then it takes away from the existing businesses.

[Speaker 4]: Yeah.

[Speaker 6]: Yeah.

[Speaker 8]: Yeah, I, I, I was referring to the entertainment zone as part of, like, an event activation or something. Yeah, yeah.

[Speaker 10]: But when it, when it's an event activation, it's still attached to an establishment that has their liquor?

[Speaker 8]: Not necessarily, no. It could be a third party.

[Speaker 10]: That's, that's one thing that's a little interesting-

[Speaker 8]: Yeah

[Speaker 10]: ... I'd like to explore, is protecting the existing businesses who already pay all the taxes and have already gone through all the things before we made it easier to be able to sell alcohol and serve the community.

[Speaker 8]: Yeah.

[Speaker 10]: And then someone comes in for an event and takes that opportunity-

[Speaker 8]: Yeah

[Speaker 10]: ... to get that foot traffic.

[Speaker 8]: So to the extent it's on the public right of way, you know, that's gonna be really the city's proprietary capacity, right? That's not really, like, a land use regulation, you know, in terms of, um, uh you know, whether it's connected with a local business or what have you. That's that's hard to do in a zoning code, uh per se, unless it's like right on private property. Typically, you're talking about something, again, in the public right of way.

[Speaker 10]: So if on the promenade, for example, this would have to be something that's discussed maybe within downtown Santa Monica-

[Speaker 8]: Yeah, exactly

[Speaker 10]: ... for example, where when they do those-

[Speaker 8]: Or within our event permits or things like that.

[Speaker 10]: Dance crews, that they have to make an arrangement that you don't take away from the-

[Speaker 8]: Mm-hmm

[Speaker 10]: ... existing businesses?

[Speaker 4]: Well, and I think it could also be part of the entertainment zones management plan as well.

[Speaker 8]: Yep, yep.

[Speaker 4]: So, um-

[Speaker 8]: Yeah

[Speaker 4]: ... which is something that you delegated authority to staff to, um, uh, promulgate-

[Speaker 8]: Yeah

[Speaker 4]: ... as part of the entertainment zone. But it, it... You know, should council wanna give direction on that at another time it's not before you this evening, but that could be discussed as part of the entertainment zone as well.

[Speaker 10]: Okay, thank you.

[Speaker 6]: Great. I just have one question. Um, since there seems to be a lot of, uh differentiation on the alcohol, uh, issue between what the planning commission recommendation is and what the staff report, staff's recommendation is, and we've had some discussion on it, um, can you tell us about how the proposed alcohol thresholds for CUPs, et cetera, um compared to other jurisdictions that we might be competing with for new business activity, i.e., like smaller cities like Pasadena, Culver City, West Hollywood Long Beach? Um, because I think it is really important as we're looking at where businesses might try to locate, you know we wanna make- be as business-friendly as possible. That's the goal here. How do we compare to other jurisdictions? And I do believe that that was answered earlier today, so hopefully, you have that information.

[Speaker 8]: Yeah, so I think we looked at retail, and we got generally information for the, uh-

[Speaker 6]: Alcohol

[Speaker 8]: ... West Hollywood, Pasadena. So there is an administrative option available, um for some eligible restaurants, um, and uh, retailers. So it may be similar to our program. I think we were-- we didn't have all the information you know, in front of us. I think we were just starting to do some of that research. Um, I will say we have had overwhelmingly positive feedback on our alcohol exemption program um, within the downtown, and now it's expanded, proposed to be the entire, uh downtown for a variety of uses. Um restaurants and recent- I looked since you know, we made this switch, and there's probably been over a hundred, uh, permits issued for-

[Speaker 6]: Wow

[Speaker 8]: ... alcohol exemption. The people that have switched over-

[Speaker 6]: Wow

[Speaker 8]: ... from CUPs are like: "We love this better," you know? And it's like, if you have everything you need, we can approve it in a matter of days, which is, um super-

[Speaker 6]: Everyone listening

[Speaker 8]: ... different.

[Speaker 6]: Hello.

[Speaker 8]: Yeah. It's pretty different than, I think our peer cities at the speed at which... and the ease. Um, it's just, like, one form. You sign and date it, staff reviews it, and if it looks fine, it's fine. Um you know, we, we try to make it easy and common sense. So, um, I think it's been wildly successful. You know, we hear really good feedback about it.

[Speaker 6]: Well, I appreciate that you all understood the assignment, and you're coming to us with the recommendations that are gonna make it easiest to do business here. So really appreciate that. I think, um, I don't see any more- Oh, Snell has questions.

[Speaker 11]: Just one quick question. And since that uh, you may not be able to answer it, but can you kind of tell us, um what type of, um w- what the effect has been with our police department, and, you know-

[Speaker 8]: Mm

[Speaker 11]: ... how many instances-

[Speaker 8]: Yeah

[Speaker 11]: ... have we had because of that?

[Speaker 8]: I mean, I think not something we've looked at, but I think if, if, if something, if, if a business was a problem, we would certainly be aware of it, you know, whether through law enforcement, code enforcement. Um, with alcohol exemptions, these are typically um, it's like a ancillary. It's a beverage service ancillary to something else. It's a restaurant. These are, like, low-risk issues, even within, um, the promenade right? Where you can open a bar with an alcohol exemption. I mean, the fact is they, they have a vested interest in, you know, behaving well, being, being good neighbors. It- we, we, we've not seen it being an issue, you know, other than the sort of, I think, like, typical, you know drunk and disorderlies, as, as may happen with any alcohol service, but it has not been a prevalent issue. Um, even during COVID, you know, when we had, um, alcohol service, you know, that may have extended like, to, um, an private, uh, parking lot, right, right next to someone's backyard. I think we had, like, one, one issue, one business that was an issue, and it was dealt with. So it just overall hasn't been, you know, this, this massive problem, um, in terms of streamlining the process.

[Speaker 0]: ... Thank you.

[Speaker 6]: Amazing. Oh, you, would you like to say something?

[Speaker 0]: Oh, yeah. Just to touch on that too, all alco- alcohol applications require a security plan approved by the police department, and that has to be provided with the application, so that's already done before it even comes to us. So that's another check that happens.

[Speaker 6]: Great, so the sky is not falling. Um okay, we have three comments for 12B: Michael Klass, Luke Kane, Will Klass. I appreciate you guys staying here for so long. Thank you.

[Speaker 12]: Good evening, Mayor, Council Members, and Mr. City Manager. My name is Michael Klass. My brother Willie and I own Santa Monica Jewelry and Loan, the city's only remaining pawn shop. We are deeply invested in this community. I live in Santa Monica with my wife and three young children. This is home. The amendment we are talking about does not expand pawnshop uses. It does not open the door to anything beyond what the city has already allowed for the past seventy-five years. The only purpose of this amendment is to correct a documented error made in the two thousand and seventeen Downtown Community Plan, an error acknowledged by planning staff themselves. Just so you know, there were originally four pawnshop licenses given out in the city of Santa Monica. We are the only pawnshop left. That mistake stripped away relocation rights that have been in existence for seventy-five years. No one informed us about the change in the DCP when it happened. We were not at the last council meeting when it was discussed because we were told it was gonna be a simple fix. That wasn't the case. We also presented this situation to the Planning Commission. They voted unanimously for the staff to correct the error and allow the relocation that was established years ago which is in your staff report. That clerical oversight is preventing us from relocating to a safer, most-- more suitable downtown, uh, space in downtown something we've done before with full city support. We purchased this business in two thousand and nine, and it has been operated in good standing for over forty-five years. We contribute nearly twenty-- we contribute twenty thousand dollars annually in license fees and pay six figures in sales tax. We serve thousands of residents who rely on safe regulated, non-recourse loans, a service no other business in the city provides. Approving this amendment does not create risk. It prevents unintended harm. It restores the city's long-standing policy. I respectfully ask you to correct the error, restore the rights the city already granted, and allow Sa-

[Speaker 6]: Thank you. Um, Luke Kane.

[Speaker 13]: Good evening again, Mayor and Council Members. Um, I'm here tonight, uh, again to discuss a matter of basic fairness and the survival of a long-standing local family business. Just a little history for seventy-five years, pawnshops have been allowed in the city of Santa Monica but were limited to the area of Second Third, and Fourth Street between Wilshire and Broadway. Angelo's Pawn Shop was the last remaining pawn shop in Santa Monica uh, which was purchased by Michael and William Klass. Angelo's original location was on Second and Santa Monica Boulevard. He was forced to move because that building was being torn down. Finding a new location was difficult. Once Mayor Genzer and the City Council became aware of the difficulty the City Council created a text amendment to allow pawnshops to operate in what the city deemed was downtown Santa Monica excluding Ocean Avenue. This allowed the pawnshops to relocate within the borders of the newly designated downtown. The first new home of the pawn shop was in this-- was in a city-owned property on Fifth Street, just off Santa Monica Boulevard. After a few years, that building was torn down. Around that time Angelo's Pawn Shop then became Santa Monica Jewelry and Loan. Being forced to move again, they moved to four oh eight Broadway, where they have operated for almost fifteen years. Santa Monica Jewelry and Loan is the only pawn shop left in the city of Santa Monica. They are heavily regulated and fully compliant. This amendment simply corrects a documented oversight admitted by the Planning Department regarding the twenty seventeen DCP. It does not allow for new pawn shops; it merely restores the re- relocation rights the city has upheld for decades. Denying this correction due to a clerical error could force out a long-standing family-run business. Blocking their ability to relocate was an error. It is not a policy. It is an unintended consequence that harms a long-standing compliant, local family-run business. This amendment simply corrects that mistake nothing more. I urge you to approve the amendment. Thank you so much for your consideration.

[Speaker 6]: Thank you, Mr. Kane. Um, Will Klass.

[Speaker 14]: Good evening, Mayor and Council Members. My name is Will Klass. My brother Michael and I own Santa Monica Jewelry and Loan and we are raising our families here, six kids between us. This city isn't just where we work, it's where our children are growing up. It's our home. For decades this family business has served this community. We purchased the business in two thousand and nine. We followed every rule, paid every fee, and relocated whenever necessary. We've done everything right, and yet today, because of a clerical mistake made in twenty seventeen, a mistake the Planning Department acknowledged, our entire livelihood is suddenly at risk. We were never told about this error. We only discovered it when we started asking questions because we are looking to move. Now, a business that has been part of Santa Monica for generations could be shut down over something we had nothing to do with. That is not how a city should treat a family business that has played by the rules. That is not how you treat a business that has stood with this community for forty-five years. This amendment does not bring in new pawn shops. It simply restores the relocation rights of an existing business the city had already granted, rights we've relied on in good faith. If this isn't corrected our employees lose their jobs, our families are harmed, and thousands of residents lose a service they depend on. I'm asking you to fix the mistake.... Restore the right to relocate in the limited area that was set up forty-five years ago and reestablish with Mayor Genzer's Coun- Council, and let us keep serving the city we love. Thank you.

[Speaker 6]: Thank you. Um, so that concludes the public comments, as we don't have any on the phone. Uh- We do have one person on the phone. Oh, I thought she wasn't here. Okay. So it's Jacob Wasserman. Oh, my apologies. Jacob Wasserman. Mr. Wasserman, are you there? Go ahead, you can start.

[Speaker 15]: Oh, yes, thank you so much. Um, hi, I'm Jacob Wasserman again, um Wilmot resident planning commissioner. Um I'm not speaking on behalf of the whole Planning Commission, but I will speak with my planning commissioner hat on. Um, this is a great ordinance. Um, I'm so thankful for the work the staff has done. One thing you might know, we actually discovered this during the Planning Commission hearing, midnight mass, um late night Simchat Torah, or any other religious event that goes into the night is currently illegal in Santa Monica if you actually enforce the rules. Um, this ordinance would correct that. Um, so there's a lot of good stuff in here. I think staff has gone over it well. I, I just wanted to clarify, um, two things. One is that the staff report talks about certain restrictions only applying on Main and Montana. Um, we had made a motion that we are fine deferring to staff on what they think is right, but that it shouldn't call out specific streets, you know, if we have zones for a reason. Um and then second, with regards to the pub crawls, um, as I understood what we decided, we were recommending that pub crawls be allowed, um, by right with an alcohol license downtown, um, but need a CUP outside of downtown, um, split the difference. Personally, I would be fine with them everywhere, but just so the record is clear, that is my understanding of what Planning Commission recommended. Um, downtown allowed, outside downtown a CUP. But otherwise, this is a great ordinance. I'm, I'm so glad staff has proposed it. I think it'll help revitalize business, both downtown and across the city. Thanks so much.

[Speaker 0]: Thank you, Mr. Wasserman. Um, Council Member Magrette?

[Speaker 1]: One comment.

[Speaker 0]: Yeah. Mm-hmm.

[Speaker 1]: Well, I wanna-- first I would like to move this item.

[Speaker 0]: Great.

[Speaker 1]: Um, because it's getting late. And I'll just quickly say, um-

[Speaker 0]: You wanna answer those policy questions?

[Speaker 1]: Yes. So question one: Um, should a CUP be required for medium scale retail twenty-five to eighty square feet, um proposed greater than fifty? Um I'm sorry. I'm just looking at that question, and I'm looking at it from the twenty-five to eighty. So we're saying it would be required for any medium scale retail above fifty-

[Speaker 2]: Maybe-

[Speaker 1]: -thousand square feet, correct?

[Speaker 2]: This is a little more helpful here.

[Speaker 1]: Sorry, 'cause you have the, both numbers in there.

[Speaker 2]: Yeah. So it's-- we didn't change the threshold of medium, so it's still twenty-five to eighty. It's just within that medium. If you go from fifty to eighty, that's when the CUP would kick in.

[Speaker 1]: So then technically, you don't need it from twenty-five to fifty?

[Speaker 2]: Correct. That would be an MUP for that instance. Um, and that's the Planning Commission recommendation.

[Speaker 1]: Um, okay, I'm gonna s- s- so... Okay fifty to eighty under both options, retail between twenty-five is more flexible, no charge. So I was gonna leave that at yes. Sorry. Um and then if you could go to the other questions. Yeah, so the pub crawl, I, I don't understand. I was also agreeing with the um, speaker on the phone, that I thought it was going to be, um, allowed, but just not outside of the entertainment zone. Um so I, I, I'm, I think we should allow the pub crawls. It feels like it's already sort of-- That's sort of the idea of the entertainment zone. Um, and then the next question. Um, yes, staff recommendation, yes. Number four is bringing back... Yes, that should have happened a long time ago. And number five, is there a fifth question?

[Speaker 2]: No, that's it.

[Speaker 1]: Okay.

[Speaker 2]: Just these four.

[Speaker 0]: Can I make a friendly amendment?

[Speaker 1]: Yeah, we-- I'm just making sure. I just wanted to go through, 'cause the square footage one was a little confusing to me. So, um, so moving yes on questions one through four, um, just quickly commenting that taking into account some of the other stuff that we talked about looking at and for me, the biggest thing is, like making sure, I guess, it- I guess it's not in here, but that we're protecting the existing businesses. Like, we don't wanna take away from those that have gone through the effort of establishing a business, and then having others come in to be able to offer and sell, uh, alcohol without utilizing them. So I'd like to move, um, twelve B with the staff recommendations or the questions answering yes to questions one through four.

[Speaker 3]: Sorry, just to clarify, um, 'cause I wasn't tracking exactly what yes versus no was on all these, but the-- we're moving the staff recommendation-

[Speaker 1]: Yes, yeah

[Speaker 3]: -for all the policy questions, and not the PC recommendation? Okay.

[Speaker 1]: Exactly.

[Speaker 3]: Thank you.

[Speaker 4]: And one, one other minor, um clarification is: Staff, um, read some changes into the record related to the RR and R as well. Just wanted to make clear that that would be part of your recommendation recall.

[Speaker 1]: Resolution?

[Speaker 4]: Yes.

[Speaker 1]: Yeah.

[Speaker 2]: Just, just for clarity, though, the, the staff recommended to remove the CUP in question one, whereas I think you were saying to keep it. Right. Yes, this-

[Speaker 3]: That's why I was asking.

[Speaker 2]: Yeah.

[Speaker 1]: Oh, sorry. Well, I guess I was, I was saying-

[Speaker 0]: We wanna maintain the medium at twenty-five to eighty.

[Speaker 2]: Yeah, so staff would allow more of a flexible process for anything from twenty-five to eighty, um, just the MUP process at most, whereas Planning Commission is the more, um-- it's a little more strict, where from fifty to eighty it's always gonna be a CUP.

[Speaker 0]: Mm-hmm.

[Speaker 2]: So staff recommendations just removes the CUP option completely.

[Speaker 0]: Yeah.

[Speaker 1]: Yeah, I know, and the Planning Commission was rejecting that.

[Speaker 2]: Yeah, and they wanted to maintain CUP for kind of this-

[Speaker 1]: I mean, I guess, like, just-

[Speaker 2]: - medium large

[Speaker 1]: ... not to go into a whole big discussion we just did that. I, I, I just- I'm trying to understand. I know right now like, I'll just say, you know, right now we're suffering to get people in and reimagining what an eighty thousand square foot gap could possibly be. And so, you know, I don't know what the dangers are what the real main concerns quickly are about, like, what would happen or what people are concerned about if we were to-

[Speaker 0]: Just to help, like, ground it a little bit for you, like, what does fifty thousand square feet look like, if that helps? It's, uh, think about the Bristol Farms Big Five combination up there. That's like, forty-seven thousand-ish square feet. Gives you a s- sense of scale. Whole Foods on Wilshire and Twenty-Third that's, like, a thirty thousand square foot-

[Speaker 1]: Mm

[Speaker 0]: ... grocery store. Um, just to j- just to give you some, some grounding as to, you know, what we're talking about. Um, I don't know that we have something that eighty thousand square feet. You know Santa Monica Place is five hundred thousand, right? So that's enormous. Um so what this is, is between twenty-five to eighty, it's either permitted or it's a minor use permit. Minor use permit allows us to take into consideration some spite- site-specific considerations, particular to that location. In all cases, what we have seen with any retail is, like, when you have a large scale, imagine what if it was Costco or something, right? It's the parking, loading, and operations piece that is always the issue, 'cause it's always the logistics of how do you, you know, deliver, um, that, that kind of thing. Um, that, that's where we often spend most of the time, you know, looking at this. So that's why the staff recommendation was either minor use permit, um, or it's a per- outright permitted use, but you must have that parking, loading, and operations plan, um in order to mitigate, you know, what would be the greatest impact without going through this, like, massive CUP, um process. So-

[Speaker 1]: Right. So what are you losing in that process?

[Speaker 0]: What are you losing in that process? Um, I don't, I, I don't know that we could advocate for a CUP, because a CUP will still be required for eighty thousand square feet and above, which is very, you know, the, the sort of, like, mega stores of which we don't even have here.

[Speaker 1]: Right.

[Speaker 0]: Um, you know, so I thought we-

[Speaker 5]: ... we, we felt that that MUP or permitted with plop was a reasonable compromise sort of balancing the ability for community input, a public hearing, you know, still taking into account, um you know, how we mitigate impacts, um from-

[Speaker 6]: Right

[Speaker 5]: ... a larger scale use.

[Speaker 6]: Well, in the spirit of, uh, economic recoveries, um, moving forward then with the staff recommendation.

[Speaker 7]: We have a second?

[Speaker 8]: I'll second.

[Speaker 7]: Great. Um, do people still wanna make co- okay, Council Member Hall, then Raskin then Zwick, then Zernitzky. Okay, Hall are you in?

[Speaker 8]: Yes, thank you. Uh, thank you, Mayor, um and thank you, Council Member Negrete, for the motion. Uh, okay, look, on the pawnshop issue, I'm willing to admit when I'm wrong, and I appreciate the additional background and history, uh, that I've learned since our last vote on this, so thank you for that. Um I will keep it very brief. You know, when we talk about a renaissance agenda for our city, the Community Development Department is leading it, so thank you for that. Um, this is a, a great, uh embodiment of what we're trying to do here and what we're trying to achieve, so thank you, um, and I'll be supporting the most, obviously.

[Speaker 7]: Raskin?

[Speaker 9]: Yeah, I echo the thanks. Uh, fantastic work all around. Um, I, I don't think it was covered in the four questions that were teed up here, but so I... As far as I understand it, the original idea for bars was to downgrade that to an MUP and the planning commission said, "No we're gonna keep the CUP on that," uh, and that's what's before us tonight. Um, I'd be curious to hear what my colleagues say. I, I'm inclined to go with staff's original recommendation for MUPs for that uh, because it can still be appealed to the planning commission if folks have concerns. So if folks are in favor of that, I'd-

[Speaker 10]: Why are you doing that?

[Speaker 11]: I, w- I, I think I, I think I spoke to that a little in my questions. Uh, my only concern is if it would delay this first reading in any way, 'cause I, I agree that I'd like to see that change. I just wanna make sure that we can pass this tonight.

[Speaker 9]: Yeah.

[Speaker 2]: Yeah, those would be pretty easy changes that we'd be able to make. So, so that could be passed tonight as a-

[Speaker 9]: Yeah.

[Speaker 5]: Okay. The way that the zoning ordinance is drafted... Well, I, yeah, the way the zoning ordinance is drafted, it would not be a difficult change. We could make it this evening. It would be brought back with that change for a second reading.

[Speaker 7]: Uh, great. Is that it?

[Speaker 11]: Oh, was it me? Sorry. Um, I just wanted to just echo my colleagues. Uh, really excited about this. I think we are, you know, really leading the way in becoming uh, uh, a city that's open for business and, and I, I think, uh, as my colleague said, um, community development is really um, uh, leading a, a, a culture change in the city that we're really excited about. Uh, beyond that, um I think, uh, you spoke, uh, Council Member Raskin spoke to one of the questions around, uh, MUP process for bars. Um uh, the only other one that I wanted to pull up here, excuse me, uh, was just uh... And I think you indicated it was already underway, but I'd like to just a, a- ask if we could include direction uh, as well, that we, when we come back, I think perhaps in June or whenever it is that we are planning with the next, um perhaps set of revisions, that we look at the office campus restrictions and, uh the trash room question, which I believe is already in process, but that was my only question, uh, additional comment.

[Speaker 7]: Great.

[Speaker 11]: If that's amenable to the, the makers.

[Speaker 6]: Yes.

[Speaker 8]: Yes.

[Speaker 6]: And then to include this amendment that we just mentioned in the motion.

[Speaker 11]: Yes, thank you.

[Speaker 7]: Council Member Zwi- um, Zernitzky.

[Speaker 8]: Sorry, bef- before Council Member Zernitzky goes, um, city attorney, would you mind, uh-

[Speaker 5]: Excuse me

[Speaker 8]: ... restating the specific amendment?

[Speaker 5]: Yes, so the specific amendment would be to, um, require not a CUP, but an MUP for bars in all locations, where, where bars are permitted.

[Speaker 8]: That is friendly to the seconder.

[Speaker 10]: S- so I just wanted to make sure I'm also understanding this. So policy question number four was, "Should non-conforming bar establishments in the, um, in the neighborhood commercial Main Street District be allowed to reopen if the establishment has been closed for more than 12 months?" Does that mean that, uh non-conforming bar establishments in other areas that have been closed for more than 12 months would also be allowed to open under an MUP, or is that, would that be something-

[Speaker 2]: The, yeah... Well, I guess under this direction, they would just follow the typical process. This is very targeted to just NC Main Street District.

[Speaker 10]: Okay, got it. So this is, this is a separate thing than-

[Speaker 2]: Right

[Speaker 10]: ... putting bars to MUP-

[Speaker 2]: Exactly

[Speaker 10]: ... places where it is already, in, to, to districts where it is already allowed.

[Speaker 2]: Right. So that's just kinda globally across the city where bars are allowed. Instead of going to a CUP, the direction is now amendment to make it an MUP.

[Speaker 10]: And to clarify, bars are allowed, I assume, in w- w- where are they allowed?

[Speaker 2]: Yeah, like pretty much all of our commercial districts, so downtown, the boulevards, Bergamot area, uh, office campus, the IC, I think even in the hospital districts, maybe. Um, so pretty much all of our commercial boulevards just not in any of the residential districts.

[Speaker 10]: Yeah, which that, that tracks.

[Speaker 2]: Right.

[Speaker 10]: I don't think we want anybody to, to have a bar in their garage, um, at least not open to the public. Um sorry, there was something. Oh, um, on that first question of the making it easier to have larger establishments, I'm super excited about that because I just saw that there is an Ikea that's gonna be opening in Culver City, and I would-

[Speaker 2]: Oh. Really?

[Speaker 10]: It's... Yeah, it's like the Costco's technically in Marina del Rey, not... Yeah, that one's a weird one. So I would love to have some sort of, um, you know larger store, like Ikea or Costco, that's specific to Santa Monica. That, that would be fabulous, and hopefully, this will make it more-... uh, more easy to do. Um yeah, no, I'm, I'm just so excited. Thank you so much for, for all the work on this and, um, yeah, look forward to what's next.

[Speaker 7]: Okay, I just wanna say two second-- two things, but I know we're, we're ready to go to closed session. Um, I am so proud to be part of this city. You guys are totally stepping up in every way, and I just wanna say major, major thank you. Um killing it. Really just appreciate you all so much. I just had to say that. Um super excited about this. I, I mentioned at the beginning, I think economic recovery requires stability and predictability, and also we have to be competitive with our other, uh, amongst our other cities in the region. Um, and I I do, uh, acknowledge the comments about cost. I think, you know, the next sixteen item is, is hopefully dealing with some of that. We, we obviously wanna reduce the cost of doing business here, but in terms of streamlining, um, you know, time is money. Super appreciate you guys creatively coming up with these options. Um, and I think we're trying to send a clear signal tonight to the entire region Santa Monica is open for business period. We are trying to remove every single artificial barrier that we can period. Uh, we wanna compete regionally and we are not trying to throw up any roadblocks. So I would just invite folks in the community, if you are seeing an issue, we wanna hear about it. Uh, and I see the staff nodding. Thank you, guys. I I think, you know I, um, I'm not opening a business on, on Main Street right now, so to the people that are, we wanna hear about it. Um, and so thank you, and this ordinance is so exciting, and I'm excited to make it permanent. Yes, go ahead.

[Speaker 10]: I remembered the other thing I wanted to say. So I, I just wanted to acknowledge that in the past, we've heard concerns from members of the public about having, uh, too many establishments that serve alcohol and, you know, the, the accessibility of alcohol. But I just wanted to make sure that folks are aware that, um, especially nowadays places that serve alcohol also serve a lot of non-alcoholic options because more and more people are choosing to abstain from alcohol or are choosing to, uh, drink less of it. Even folks who do drink alcohol will sometimes drink non-alcoholic beverages, like a mocktail or non-alcoholic beer. So we're just giving people more choices and promoting, uh, promoting opportunities for new businesses within our city, is how I'm looking at it. So just wanted to make sure I made that point. Thank you.

[Speaker 7]: Awesome. Let's vote.

[Speaker 12]: Yes.

[Speaker 7]: Council Member, Council Member Negrete?

[Speaker 12]: Yes.

[Speaker 7]: Council Member Hall?

[Speaker 13]: Yes.

[Speaker 7]: Council Member Raskin?

[Speaker 14]: Yes.

[Speaker 7]: Mayor Pro Tem Schlik?

[Speaker 11]: Yes.

[Speaker 7]: Council Member Snell?

[Speaker 15]: Yes.

[Speaker 7]: Council Member Czarnespeck- Czarnorskaya?

[Speaker 1]: Yes.

[Speaker 7]: And Mayor Terosis.

[Speaker 16]: Yes.

[Speaker 7]: Okay.

[Speaker 12]: Okay so now we're moving on to 16A. It's request of Mayor Pro Tem Swick and Council Member Negrete that the furtherance of the city's economic revitalization strategy, the City Council direct the city manager and city attorney to analyze and present options for supporting retail to restaurant and hospitality conversations.

[Speaker 1]: So nobody's-

[Speaker 12]: Wanted to take the lead on this.

[Speaker 1]: Can I-- Do you mind if I introduce it? Um okay, so this is about continuing on what we were just talking about, activating retail space, removing unnecessary barriers for small businesses who wanna invest in Santa Monica. We've spent years talking about economic revitalization. Um one of the clearest challenges we hear especially downtown and along our commercial corridors, is that converting an existing retail space into a restaurant is really cost prohibitive. It's not just rent and wastewater fees, it's grease interceptors, ventilation, ADA upgrades fire, life safety modifications, and these are legitimate requirements, but the cumulative cost can stop a project before it even begins. Um, a few years ago, I explored whether we could provide wastewater fee relief to existing restaurants, and I bring that up because it was months of meeting with restaurants and hearing, um, the impacts of those wastewater fee, uh, per seat charges. And at the time, we were told that it wasn't a viable option under the current structure. So this item reflects some lessons learned, and instead of looking backwards, we're looking forwards conversions and new investment, and asking: How can we design a targeted pilot that works within our legal fiscal framework? This item simply asks staffs to analyze options for a pilot program that could waive, defer, or reduce certain fees and provide targeted support for tenant improvements that unlock these conversions. We're not eliminating standards. We're not compromising safety. We're just exploring how to strategically lower barriers so that small operators can activate storefronts. Restaurants drive foot traffic, foot traffic drives retail and retail drives our economic recovery. And if we're serious about this economic revitalization, we def- definitely need to make it easier, not harder, for entrepreneurs to say yes to Santa Monica. Um, and I just wanna say that I have been bringing to the city manager's office many of my own personal contacts and colleagues coming in to look at bringing their businesses here downtown, um, and in Santa Monica, and one of the biggest things is looking at turning these existing retail spaces into restaurants and these fees create a huge roadblock. And I can tell you, there are folks that aren't even in the state of California that I know tonight personally are watching this meeting pertinent to this item. So I'm looking forward to the, um analysis and discussion.

[Speaker 11]: There we go. Uh, yeah, I'll just echo, uh Council Member Negrete. Um, we, we did amazing work tonight, um, in making it easier from a zoning and permitting perspective to create the kind of vitality that we're seeing. And, you know, when it comes to restaurants, um, and other hospitality uses, uh-... as mentioned, um when you're converting a sort of b- blank box retail space, it's, it's expensive and complicated, and I think we just wanna be doing everything we can as a city, not just to make it legal, but make it feasible to have these kind of establishments. This is something I think the whole, you know, goal, the whole council shares. I think we even talked about this as possible direction when we talked about the sign, uh, program as a as a use of revenues, um, when it comes to facilitating these kind of uses. So I see this as just consistent with what the whole council has been pushing for, and uh, excited to kind of just add this to our arsenal as we really, uh, work to revitalize, uh, this area.

[Speaker 7]: Councilor Muhl?

[Speaker 8]: Yes, we'd like to move the item.

[Speaker 7]: Great.

[Speaker 17]: Yay!

[Speaker 6]: Second.

[Speaker 7]: All those in favor?

[Speaker 18]: Aye.

[Speaker 7]: Any opposed or abstain? No. Great. Um City Attorney, do you want-- Or sorry City, City Clerk, are you reading us into closed session?

[Speaker 6]: I'll get that. I'll come back. I'm just getting it.

[Speaker 7]: Oh, um-

[Speaker 12]: Unlike you guys, I'm ready to get you out of here.

[Speaker 7]: We're ready for reading into closed session and just wanna confirm about whether-

[Speaker 12]: All right, so here's the, here's the closed-

[Speaker 7]: Yeah.

[Speaker 12]: Let me get them real quick. Okay, so the first one is existing litigation, and this is John Doe et al., and with a... Sorry, with a bunch of Do- John Does. I had this other one. Okay. Next, we have five B, and it's an existing litigation. It's the city versus ICSLP. Next, we have Edgar Espinoza versus the City. Then we have another existing litigation. It's the People of the State of California versus Saeed Farzan.

[Speaker 7]: Hmm.

[Speaker 12]: Then we have another existing litigation is Pavilions Motel, Inc., versus the City of Santa Monica. Then we have a significant exposure litigation. It's one case. We have, um, a real estate negotiation. This is five G. It's two five six Santa Monica Pier and Oliver Chi is the city manager. He will be negotiator of record, will be negotiating with Sean Ahos. Sorry. Um California Roadhouse. Then we have five H, another real estate negotiation, and it's for two zero one nine and nineteen oh five Pico Boulevard and Oliver Chi, city manager, will be the city's negotiator with Dennis Ryl- Rydler and they'll be negotiating the terms and the payment for a lease. Then we have another one. It's another real estate, and it's twenty twenty Fourteenth Street Santa Monica. Again, the city manager will be negotiating on the city's behalf with Thea-- I hope I'm not messing up her last name, Capicelli. And this is, um-- They'll be negotiating for terms for a payment of a lease. Then again, we have another one. It's five six hundred Rickenbacker Road Bell, California, and the city-- and this is Salvation Army. And then finally, the last one we have is an existing litigation. It's Ferole Williams versus the City.

[Speaker 7]: Great.

[Speaker 12]: City attorney? So we estimate a return in ninety minutes and there may be some report outs, so we will need to reconvene for the report outs briefly.

[Speaker 7]: And is anyone gonna recuse themselves?

[Speaker 11]: Yes, I have, um... Excuse me, as I pull it up. Um, I will be recusing myself from item five F due to a potential conflict of interest under Government Code Section eight seven one zero zero.

[Speaker 7]: Any other ones?

[Speaker 8]: Yes, uh, Mayor and Clerk, I will be recusing myself from items five H, five I and five J, due to a potential conflict of interest under Government Code Section eight seven one zero zero.

[Speaker 7]: Great, um, so we will be back in ninety minutes. That should be around eleven fifteen, and we'll maybe report out, so we're all returning back at that point.

[Speaker 18]: Wow.

[Speaker 7]: Oh, you're recusing, too?

[Speaker 18]: No, I'm not recusing-

[Speaker 7]: Oh.

[Speaker 18]: -but I'd like to, uh-

[Speaker 7]: Oh, yes

[Speaker 18]: ... make the adjournment in public now.

[Speaker 7]: Okay, that's a good idea.

[Speaker 18]: Okay.

[Speaker 7]: Okay, we're gonna do our adjournment now before we come back. Go ahead, Barry.

[Speaker 18]: Th- thank you, Mayor. Um, I would like to adjourn this public tonight's meeting in memory of Reverend Jesse L. Jackson Sr. who passed away on February seventeenth twenty twenty-six, at the age of eighty-four. Reverend Jackson was one of the most consequential civil rights leader of the last half-century. A close associate of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., he carried forward the fight for racial justice, voting rights, and economic fairness, and political inclusion. He was one of the original authors of DEI. Through Operation PUSH and the Rainbow Coalition, and through his historic presidential campaigns in nineteen eighty-four and nineteen eighty-eight, he expanded civil participation and gave voice to communities long excluded from power. His work also touched Santa Monica directly. In nineteen ninety-five, he visited the Santa Monica College, where he spoke in defense of affirmative action and encouraged students to engage fully in civic life. And in two thousand and three, he stood with grocery workers in Santa Monica during the Bonds and Food for Last Strike, joining UFCW members on picket lines in support of fair wages and healthcare and protection for working families. Reverend Jackson believed deeply in solidarity, that students, workers, and communities all have a role in shaping more justice society. His visits here reflected that belief. "Keep hope alive," "I am somebody," were statements that are inspired a generation and are-- could currently be used today. For his long-- for his lifelong commitment to civil rights, economic justice, and democratic participation, I ask that we adjourn tonight's open meeting in memory of Reverend Jesse L. Jackson Sr. Thank you. Thank you.

[Speaker 7]: Thanks so much, Barry, and we'll see everyone back in ninety minutes.

[Speaker 16]: ... We are back. It is eleven forty, and, uh, city attorney would you mind, uh, giving us a report out of closed session?

[Speaker 4]: Yes. All matters were heard with the following reportable actions taken. For item five C, the city council approved a settlement in Espinoza v. City, a personal injury case involving a claim the plaintiff was struck by a city maintenance vehicle. The city denies liability and does not admit fault, but agreed to settle for eight million dollars, and in exchange, plaintiff agreed to release all claims against the city, um, against the city. Amounts exceeding the city's one million dollar self-insured retention policy will be paid by the city's excess insurer. The settlement was approved by a vote of seven to zero. For items five D and five E, People v. Farzam and Pavilions Motel v. City of Santa Monica, the city council approved a settlement of a vote of seven, seven zero. The cases involve a nuisance abatement lawsuit filed by the city against the owners of Pavilions Motel for allowing drug and other nuisance activity to occur on the property, and a lawsuit filed by the motel owners in a federal court challenging the city's revocation of the of the owner's business license to operate a hotel on the property. In accordance with the settlement, the property owners would agree to not reopen the motel operate any other business at the property, or allow any occupancy of the property, maintain the property in compliance with the drug abatement law and city property maintenance, vacant property, and public nuisance code, not own any other motel in Santa Monica for a period of ten years, not transfer ownership of a motel-- of the motel on site to a new owner unless through a legitimate arm's length sale by a buyer approved by the-- to a buyer approved by the city, and a, uh, hundred thousand dollar suspended penalty for violation of the terms of the settlement. In addition uh, the, um, property owner would agree to dismissal of the federal lawsuit. And finally, for item five K, at its February twenty-eight, twenty twenty-six meeting the city council approved a settlement in Furley Williams v. City, a personal injury case involving a claim that Williams was injured when he was struck by a Big Blue Bus wh- while crossing the street. The city denies liability and does not admit fault, but agreed to settle for s- six hundred forty-five thousand, and in exchange, Williams agreed to release all claims against the city. The settlement was approved by a vote of seven zero.

[Speaker 16]: Great, um, so that concludes our meeting and we will, uh, see everyone on March tenth. We are-- No-

[Speaker 4]: See everybody Saturday.

[Speaker 16]: Well, we will see everyone for a special meeting on Saturday. We'll see you all for our next regularly scheduled meeting on March tenth. Thank you all so much.

[Speaker 6]: What, what time does our meeting on Saturday?
